Page 1
Empowering
Transformation
Sustainability Report 2017

Page 2
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017

Page 3
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
About this RepoRt
REPORT STRUCTURE
The Volkswagen Group is committed to providing transparency to 
all its stakeholder groups. For the first time, this Group Sustainability 
Report 2017 includes a combined separate nonfinancial report that 
complies with sections 289b para. 3 and 315b para. 3 of the Handels-
gesetzbuch (HGB – German Commercial Code), hereinafter referred to 
as the “nonfinancial report”. The nonfinancial report serves to meet 
the disclosure requirements of the CSR-Richtlinie-Umsetzungsgesetz 
(CSR-RUG – German CSR Directive Implementation Act).   
In the Group Sustainability Report, all text passages, tables and  
graphics that form part of the nonfinancial report are indicated by a 
gray background. The Group Sustainability Report 2017 is supplemented 
by a detailed description of the sustainability activities of our brands 
and regions and of the Volkswagen Group’s CSR projects. This additional 
information, which does not form part of the nonfinancial report, can 
be found on the Volkswagen Group’s corporate website at:  
www.volkswagenag.com > Sustainability > Reporting 
Information on conflicting sustainability objectives and the “diesel 
issue” may be found in our separate sustainability magazine, Shift 2017. 
The publication is available here: www.volkswagenag.com > 
 Sustainability > Shift.
REPORTING 
(INCL. NONFINANCIAL REPORT)
Strategy and Management
Products and Production
People and Responsibility
Appendix
Brands and Regions
CSR-Projects worldwide
OTHER 
SUSTAINABILITY ACTIVITIES
Sustainability magazine
Shift 2017
MAGAZINE
Das Nachhaltigkeitsmagazin von Volkswagen 2017
SCHATTEN
Nach zwei Jahren  
Dieselkrise stellen sich  
alte und neue Fragen.
Volksw
agen AG
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shift. D
as N
achhaltigkeitsm
agazin von Volksw
agen N
ovem
ber 2017
LICHT
Kluge Köpfe entwickeln 
spannende Konzepte und  
bauen das Unternehmen 
nachhaltig um. 
Shift
About This 
Report

Page 4
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
4
About this RepoRt
REPORTING PRINCIPLES
For the first time, Volkswagen AG will issue a nonfinancial statement 
at company level for reporting year 2017 and a nonfinancial Group 
statement for reporting year 2017, which will be published together as 
a combined separate nonfinancial report in the sense of HGB sections 
289b para. 3 and 315b para. 3 as part of the Group Sustainability  
Report 2017. The nonfinancial report is drawn up in accordance with  
HGB sections 315b and 315c, in conjunction with sections 289c 
through 289e. Furthermore, the GRI Standards of the Global Reporting 
Initiative (GRI) were used as the framework for drawing up the non-
financial report. In this nonfinancial report, Volkswagen has system-
atically used the GRI Standards of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) 
as the underlying structure for the materiality analysis and reports 
on management approaches, as well as the specific standard disclo-
sures also included in the GRI Content Index. As required by CSR-RUG, 
this nonfinancial report concentrates on those action areas that are 
necessary for an understanding of the Volkswagen Group’s business 
development, performance and position, as well as the Volkswagen 
Group’s influence on nonfinancial aspects. 
In terms of content, the Group Sustainability Report was prepared in 
compliance with the GRI Standards of the Global Reporting Initiative 
(GRI), applying the “Comprehensive” option. At the same time, the  
GRI Content Index shows how we are implementing the requirements 
of the United Nations Global Compact (UN GC) and have committed 
ourselves to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), 
as well as the criteria of the German Sustainability Code (DNK).
Important ideas for the report’s content were provided by the ques-
tionnaires and appraisals of sustainability-oriented rating agencies.  
We also took our lead from Stakeholder Engagement Standard AA1000.
To validate issues of material significance for the Volkswagen Group 
resulting from various global challenges, we drew upon the findings  
of the Volkswagen Group’s Stakeholder Panel, which has been in place 
for many years now, as well as the results of the latest comprehensive  
stakeholder surveys conducted by Group companies Audi, MAN, 
Porsche and Volkswagen Financial Services.
This sustainability report also takes account of the recommendations 
made by the previous Stakeholder Panel following the latter’s evalua-
tion of the Group Sustainability Report.
To manage its sustainability performance, the Volkswagen Group re-
cords strategic key performance indicators (KPIs) in accordance with 
the requirements of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and the 
framework for ESG (environment, social and governance) indicators 
defined by the European Federation of Financial Analysts’ Societies 
(EFFAS). Increasingly, shareholders and investors are calling for trans-
parency, making them an important target group for our sustainability 
reporting. 
The KPIs presented in this report build on the indicators presented 
in previous years. We have made no changes in the methods used to 
collect and measure the data on our sustainability performance. The 
Volkswagen Group’s global production network comprised 120 produc-
tion sites at the end of the reporting year. This is now the sixth time we 
have reported our emissions in line with Scope 3 of the WBCSD/WRI 
Greenhouse Gas Protocol (GHG).
In general, the KPIs relate to the entire Group. In addition to Volkswa-
gen AG, the Group includes all major subsidiaries inside and outside 
Germany that are directly or indirectly controlled by Volkswagen AG. 
In the financial data, our joint ventures in China are reported using the 
equity accounting method. However, they are included in full (100%) 
in volume-related data (sales, production and workforce) and environ-
mentally relevant data. 
GRi 102-45, 102-48, 102-49  
 
 
REPORTING PRACTICES
The nonfinancial report and Group Sustainability Report are published 
annually. In addition to information about the Group’s sustainability 
activities in the 2017 fiscal year (1 January to 31 December 2017), the 
sustainability report also contains selected information from the 2018 
fiscal year. The editorial deadline was 6 February 2018, and both re-
ports appear in German and English. The next nonfinancial report will 
be published in the second quarter (Q2) of 2019, and we anticipate that 
the next Group Sustainability Report will also appear in Q2 2019. 
REPORT AUDIT
The combined separate nonfinancial report prepared in accordance 
with HGB sections 289b para. 3 and 315b para. 3 was subjected to a 
voluntary, limited assurance audit by PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH 
Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft (PwC) in accordance with ISAE 3000 
(Revised), to verify that its disclosures comply with the principles of 
the Sustainability Reporting Standards of the Global Reporting Initia-
tive and the relevant statutory requirements. 
Further information on the audit can be found in the independent 
auditor’s remarks on nonfinancial reporting in the Independent 
Assurance Report.

Page 5
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
5
About this RepoRtAbout this RepoRt
ADDITIONAL REPORTING WITHIN THE GROUP
The nonfinancial report was drawn up in compliance with HGB 
section 315c in conjunction with sections 289c through 289e. By 
referencing this combined separate nonfinancial report, all Group 
companies required by national legislation to disclose nonfinancial 
and diversity-related information pursuant to Directive 2014/95/EU 
are exempted from the obligation to submit their own nonfinancial 
reports. 
More detailed insights into our environmental management approach 
can be found in the environmental statements published by numer-
ous Group locations as part of their voluntary participation in the 
European Eco-Management and Audit Scheme (EMAS). The sustain-
ability reports published by the Audi, MAN, Porsche, Scania and 
ŠKODA brands also bear testimony to the Group’s commitment to 
sustainability.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
A list of links is provided under “Supplementary Information”, so that 
readers can rapidly access documents covering the selected content in 
more detail. This list can be found online at: www.volkswagenag.com/
en/sustainability/policy.html. The latest, continuously updated news 
on sustainability in the Volkswagen Group can be found on the Group 
portal at:  www. volkswagenag.com/sustainability.
FRAME OF REFERENCE
The information in this report relates to the Volkswagen Group as a 
whole. Where information relates to individual Group brands only, 
this is clearly indicated in the text. 
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
This sustainability report contains statements relating to the future 
business development of the Volkswagen Group. These statements 
are based on assumptions regarding the development of the eco-
nomic and legal conditions in individual countries and economic 
regions, in particular as they relate to the automotive industry, 
which we have made on the basis of the information available to us 
and which we consider to be realistic at the time of publication.  
The resulting estimates entail a degree of risk, and actual develop-
ments may differ from those predicted. Any changes in significant 
parameters relating to our key sales markets, or any significant 
shifts in exchange rates of relevance to the Volkswagen Group, will 
have a corresponding impact on the development of our business. 
In addition, there may be departures from our expected business 
development if the assessments of factors influencing sustainable 
value enhancement, and of risks and opportunities, presented in 
this sustainability report develop in a way other than we expect at 
the time of publication, or if additional risks and opportunities or 
other factors emerge that affect the development of our business.
CALCULATION OF FLEET EMISSIONS IN EUROPE
The figure for Group fleet CO? emissions is the figure annually record-
ed in the course of official monitoring pursuant to “Regulation (EC) 
443/2009 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 April 
2009 setting emission performance standards for new passenger cars 
as part of the Community’s integrated approach to reduce CO? emis-
sions from light-duty vehicles” by the European Environment Agency 
(EEA) on behalf of the European Commission for the brands belong-
ing to the group of connected manufacturers “VW Group PC”. This 
figure is the volume-weighted average of all specific CO? emissions 
from new passenger cars registered for the first time in the respective 
calendar year, based on the calculation logic defined in EU Regula-
tion 443/2009. Provided that the figure for fleet CO? emissions is set 
down in a Commission Implementing Decision to confirm or amend 
the average specific CO? emissions and specific emissions targets for 
manufacturers of passenger cars for the respective calendar year in 
accordance with Regulation (EC) 443/2009 of the European Parliament 
and of the Council, this figure is published; otherwise, provisional CO? 
emission figures are published, which are evaluated on the basis of 
internal systems using the same logic.
NOTICE PURSUANT TO EU DIRECTIVE 1999/94 EC
Further information on the official fuel consumption and official  
specific CO? emissions of new passenger cars can be found in the 
“Guide on the Fuel Economy, CO? Emissions and Power Consumption of 
All New Passenger Car Models Offered for Sale on the German Market”, 
which can be obtained free of charge from all sales outlets of and directly 
from DAT Deutsche Automobil Treuhand GmbH, Hellmuth-Hirth-
Strasse 1, 73760 Ostfildern, Germany, or downloaded from: www.dat.de

Page 6
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
6
About this RepoRt  |  NoNfiNANciAl RepoRt (NfR)
Nonfinancial 
Report (NFR)
INDEX FOR THE NONFINANCIAL REPORT
The following index provides an overview of the disclosures required 
for the nonfinancial report in accordance with HGB section 315c in 
conjunction with sections 289c through 289e, together with appro-
priate references to the sections of this Group Sustainability Report 
in which these disclosures may be found. 
PwC has subjected the elements of the Group Sustainability Report 
that make up the nonfinancial report to a voluntary limited assur-
ance audit in accordance with ISAE 3000 (Revised).
All text passages, tables and graphics in the Group Sustainability 
Report that form part of the nonfinancial report are indicated by a 
gray background. 
References to disclosures outside the summarized management 
report are supplementary information and do not form part of the 
nonfinancial report.
Based on various global challenges, the Volkswagen Group has drawn 
up a list of 18 key action areas. This analysis was based on external 
studies, industry analyses and stakeholder surveys, as well as internal 
policies and guidelines from our different divisions. These action 
areas were largely defined on the basis of the findings of expert work-
shops held in the past that addressed topics relating to the economy, 
the environment and civil society.
In the course of evaluating the statutory reporting requirements, 
Volkswagen expanded its materiality analysis and revised the action 
areas in terms of the requirements of the CSR Directive Implemen-
tation Act (CSR-RUG). In line with CSR-RUG, this nonfinancial report 
will concentrate on those action areas that are necessary for an under - 
standing of the Volkswagen Group’s business development, overall 
performance and position, as well as the Volkswagen Group’s influ-
ence on nonfinancial aspects.
The Volkswagen Group’s action areas were evaluated in terms of  
their strategic importance for TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 and their 
stakeholder relevance. In addition, the implications of CSR-RUG for  
the disclosure of nonfinancial information were discussed with 
representatives of the brands and corporate functions in four work-
shops. Furthermore, the significance of what is known as the “impact 
outlook” for the evaluation of action areas for the Volkswagen Group 
was discussed in the Group CSR Meeting (GCM).
In the course of this process, Volkswagen identified a total of 11 
material aspects as defined in CSR-RUG. A detailed description of 
this materiality process can be found in the section on Strategy and 
Management on page 28.

Page 7
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
7
About this RepoRt  |  NoNfiNANciAl RepoRt (NfR) About this RepoRt  |  NoNfiNANciAl RepoRt (NfR)
INDEX – NONFINANCIAL REPORT
Relevant content in Sustainability Report 2017 Page(s)
Description of the business model the Volkswagen Group;
toGetheR – strategy 2025
16, 18;
20–22
Material Risks Risk Management 46–47
Nonfinancial aspect  Action area Section of Sustainability Report 2017 Page(s)
broad thematic issues affecting 
all nonfinancial aspects
compliance, risk management,  
governance
the Volkswagen Group; 
toGetheR – strategy 2025;
sustainable Management;
Action plan – strategy and 
Management; 
compliance;
Risk Management
16–18;
20–22;
27;
35;
44–45;
46–47
supplier management Action plan – strategy 
and Management;
supplier Management
36;
37–39
customer matters customer satisfaction customer satisfaction and  
customer loyalty
23
environmental matters Resource conservation throughout  
life cycle
toGetheR – strategy 2025;
Management Approach – products  
and production;
Action plan – products and 
production;
energy, co? and climate change;
production and logistics
22;  
50;
54;  
 
59–62;  
65–67
climate protection and decarbonization Management Approach – products  
and production;
energy, co? and climate change
50;
59–62
employee matters employer attractiveness Management Approach; 
the 9 strategic initiatives of  
“empower to transform”;
strategic objective: excellent employer
strategic objective: skilled and 
 committed employees
72–73;  
74; 
75
78
Diversity and equal opportunities Management Approach; 
the 9 strategic initiatives of  
“empower to transform”;
strategic objective: exemplary  
leadership and corporate culture
72–73;  
74;  
 
85–86
occupational health and safety Management Approach; 
the 9 strategic initiatives of  
“empower to transform”;
strategic objective: skilled and  
committed employees
72–73;  
74;  
 
81
social matters social responsibility * Management Approach;
the 9 strategic initiatives of  
“empower to transform”;
corporate citizenship
72–73;  
74;  
 
91–93
Respect for human rights human rights the 9 strategic initiatives of  
“empower to transform”; 
human Rights
74;  
 
89–90
combating corruption 
and bribery
compliance, risk management,  
governance
sustainable Management;
Action plan – strategy and 
Management; 
compliance
27;  
35;  
 
44–45
No reportable correlations with amounts reported in the annual financial statements or consolidated financial statements were identified. 
* This action area relates to both environmental and social matters.

Page 8
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
10
Strategy and  
Management
Table of  
Contents
48
Products and  
Production
50 — Management Approach
55 — Powertrain and Fuel Strategy
59 — Energy, CO? and Climate Change
64 — Production and Logistics
69 — Product and Road Safety
12 — Letter to Our Stakeholders
15 — Diesel Crisis. A Status Report
16 — The Volkswagen Group
20 — TOGETHER – Strategy 2025
23 — Customer Satisfaction and Customer Loyalty
25 — Sustainable Mobility
27 — Sustainable Management
37 — Supplier Management
42 — Integrity
44 — Compliance
46 — Risk Management
NAVIGATION
supplementary online information on brands, regions and/or csR projects
References to sections in the sustainability report
References to websites
Reference to the Annual Report
Reference to the GRi content index
Nonfinancial report

Page 9
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
94
Appendix
  96 — Supplementary Indicators
104 — GRI Content Index
118 — Ratings and Indices
120 — Supplementary Information
122 — Independent Assurance Report
124 — Legal Notices
70
People and 
Responsibility
72 — Management Approach
75 — Strategic Objective: Excellent Employer
78 — Strategic Objective: Skilled and Committed Employees
83 —  Strategic Objective: Work Organization  
Fit for the Future
85 —  Strategic Objective: Exemplary Leadership and 
 Corporate Culture
88 — Strategic Objective: First-Rate HR Organization
89 — Human Rights
91 — Social Responsibility

Page 10
Strategy and 
Management

Page 11
Strategy and 
Management
As one of the world’s largest industrial corporations, our Group bears a  
special social responsibility. We wish to put our creative powers to good use  
for the benefit of people and the environment. Every year we produce more than 
10 million vehicles. This gives rise to positive effects – such as new jobs,  
regional prosperity and individual opportunities for participation – but also to  
negative impacts, due above all to emissions and resource consumption. And in 
 view of the growing trend toward digitalization, we will be obliged to confront  
new issues in the future – what we do with our customers’ data, for example,  
how we ensure this data is secure and protected at all times, and what legal and  
ethical quandaries are raised by automated driving.

Page 12
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
12
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  letteR to  ouR stAkeholDeRs
DEAR READERS, 
In real terms, what will mobility look like the day after tomorrow? How important will the car be as a 
means of transport? When will artificial intelligence finally replace the driver? None of these questions 
can be answered with absolute certainty today. Only one thing is certain. The scope of the change facing 
the Volkswagen Group, and indeed the entire automotive industry, is more wide-reaching than anything 
our industry has experienced in its 130-year history.
In truth, our Company faces a dual challenge. We have not yet surmounted the diesel crisis for which we 
ourselves are responsible; its consequences will continue to weigh on us for the foreseeable future. We have 
taken significant steps to strengthen our internal processes and control mechanisms, and to refocus on 
compliance and integrity – by revising our Code of Conduct, for example, and extending our whistleblower 
system. We continue to work on the renewal of our corporate culture, by flattening our hierarchies, giving 
our employees more personal responsibility and decentralizing our management, and by drawing up our 
Code of Cooperation as a platform for open collaboration in and between our Group companies. 
But all these initiatives, as well as the impressive commitment of our workforce to this process of change, 
must take a back seat when news of the misconduct and poor judgments that unfortunately took place 
within our Company once again becomes public. And it shows that both as a Company and as an industry, 
we must deal much more seriously and sensitively with ethical issues, and act even more decisively on 
sustainability issues. 
In our program for the future, TOGETHER – Strategy 2025, we clearly describe our way forward into a 
new world of mobility. Our plans build on Volkswagen’s qualities: our innovative strength, our technical 
expertise, the enormous commitment of our employees around the world. But we also set ourselves new 
priorities. For example, Roadmap E, published in September 2017, put flesh on the bones of our electrifi-
cation strategy. By 2025, our Group companies will make more than 80 new electric models available to 
our customers. By 2030, we will electrify our entire model portfolio. By doing so, we are convinced that 
the Volkswagen Group can make a significant contribution to boosting the e-mobility breakthrough. 
Living up to this self-imposed commitment will not only require a great deal of effort, but also a great deal 
of money. Over the next few years, we will be investing more than €34 billion in e-mobility, autonomous 
driving, digitalization and new mobility services. The lion’s share will be spent on electrification. This is 
how we will turn Volkswagen into a pioneer of zero-emission mobility. As far as our Group is concerned, 
the transport revolution and the energy revolution are inseparably intertwined. 
E-mobility is still in its infancy. And there are still many unresolved questions regarding the e-mobility 
value chain and product life cycle – from raw materials and energy production through to infrastructure 
and recycling. As the Volkswagen Group, we are helping to answer these questions, both by contributing 
our expertise and by assuming responsibility. 
Letter to  
Our Stakeholders

Page 13
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
13
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  letteR to  ouR stAkeholDeRs stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  letteR to  ouR stAkeholDeRs
Volkswagen will play a courageous, consistent and responsible role in the systemic shift to new drive  
technologies. And we will do so without neglecting current technologies and vehicle projects. This is  
how we will earn money today so we can invest it in tomorrow.  
The recommendations of the Group Sustainability Council we appointed in 2016 should help to restore 
the trust and confidence of our employees, our customers and the general public. By working together, we 
aim to prepare our Group for the future, molding Volkswagen into the perfect model of a corporation that 
operates sustainably, with integrity – and is at the same time commercially successful. 
For a long time, Volkswagen could be found at the top of the most prestigious sustainability indices – and 
we aim to reclaim that position. As a Group, our intrinsic mission is to make a key contribution to solving 
critical problems. We want to work with others to mitigate climate change and improve urban air quality. 
This is why we are setting ourselves new, ambitious production targets. By 2025, we intend to reduce neg-
ative environmental impacts in our production plants by a further 20%. This means 45% less energy, CO?, 
water, solvents and waste per vehicle compared with our 2010 baseline.
Traditionally, the social aspects of sustainability are very important to us at Volkswagen. Consequently, 
even at a time when the automotive industry is undergoing a fundamental transformation, we continue 
 to regard economic success and job security as equal priorities. We want to help shape the future of 
work in an increasingly digitalized world. We are committed to equal opportunities, education, stronger 
social values and support for disadvantaged people in all walks of life. Many thousands of our employees 
around the world are also working as volunteers in social and environmental projects. By doing so, they 
are making an important contribution to social cohesion – even outside the factory gates.
The Sustainability Report for 2017 before you will give you an insight into our efforts. To make the disclosures, 
figures and data in this report transparent, understandable and easy to compare, we have followed the guide-
lines of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI), with reference to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)  
of the United Nations. This report also represents our Communication on Progress under the United Nations 
Global Compact (UNGC) and serves as our Nonfinancial Declaration under the CSR-Richtlinie-Umsetzungs-
gesetz (CSR-RUG – German CSR Directive Implementation Act). 
We look forward to receiving your suggestions and feedback.
M. Müller
“ Low-emission drive technologies; smart mobility 
services; innovative, safe solutions for autonomous 
driving – these are among the ambitious plans we are 
working on right now as we look ahead to the future.”

Page 14
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
14
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  letteR to  ouR stAkeholDeRs

Page 15
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
15
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  letteR to  ouR stAkeholDeRs stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt | Diesel cRisis. A stAtus RepoRt
More information can be found in our  
sustainability magazine, shift 2017.
More information can be found in our  
Annual Report 2017.
The diesel crisis was made public on September 18, 2015 – a date 
etched in the Group’s collective memory. Key events are shown in the 
timeline below. 
The diesel issue prompted a process by which we strengthened our 
corporate culture, particularly in the areas of compliance and inter-
nal control mechanisms. This development led to the initiation of 
programs and projects designed to intensify Volkswagen’s collective 
awareness of integrity.  
We honed our internal control systems for the product development 
process and vehicle testing, overhauled our Code of Conduct and the 
whistleblower system, and increased the frequency of the training 
courses provided to staff on these topics. 
The combination of integrity, compliance and culture is an important 
and indispensable part of the transformation process we are under-
going. We are renewing ourselves from the inside out and are evolving 
on a daily basis to merit our most important asset – the trust of our 
customers and shareholders.  
Our exhaustive investigation continues; it also touches on a wide 
range of legal issues. Further information on this complex subject 
area can be found in the Management Report in our Annual Report 
2017. A critical analysis also appears in our sustainability magazine, 
Shift 2017. 
Diesel Crisis.  
A Status Report
TIMELINE
Jan 4, 2016
US lawsuit
Jan 27, 2016
Recall begins 
in Germany
Jun 8, 2016
KBA approves 
2.5 million 
vehicles
Feb 29, 2016
Geneva: 
Digitalization, 
Group Future 
Center
Oct 24, 2016
Group 
Sustainability 
Council
Jun 16, 2016
TOGETHER–
Strategy 
2025
Nov 17, 2016
Pact for the 
Future
Feb 28, 2017
EMIS Committee 
Final Report*
Feb 3, 2016
Trust campaign
Mar 8, 2017
Committee of 
Inquiry ?nishes 
its work
Jun 28, 2016
Steps toward 
agreement 
in USA
Apr 22, 2016
Status of 
clari?cation – 
nothing
published
Mar 10, 2017
Settlement 
comes into 
force
Oct 25, 2016
Settlement 
approved 
by C. Breyer
Aug 26, 2016
US dealers 
compensated
Jan 11, 2017
Statements 
of Fact 
by DOJ*
USA/CANADA EU28/RoW COMPANY As at: February 6, 2018
Jan 1, 2016
Nov 23, 2016 
Publication 
of Shift
sustainability 
magazine
Nov 16, 2017 
Publication 
of issue 2 
of Shift
sustainability 
magazine
Mar 08, 2017
Parliamentary investigations 
concludes its work 
Aug 02, 2017
“Diesel summit” 
*Department of Justice (DOJ); Emission Measurements in the Automotive Sector (EMIS).

Page 16
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
16
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  the VolkswAGeN GRoup
The Volkswagen Group
With 12 brands, the Volkswagen Group – based in Wolfsburg, Germany – is one of the world’s leading automobile 
manufacturers and the largest in Europe. In 2017, the Group – including Chinese joint ventures – delivered a total 
of 10,741,455 cars and commercial vehicles to customers. The Group has a 12.1% share of the global passenger  
car market, and reported after-tax earnings of €11,638 million on sales revenue of €230,682 million in 2017.  
More than 640,000 employees produce an average of 44,170 vehicles per working day at 120 manufacturing  
locations on four continents, or are involved in the provision of mobility-related services.
STRUCTURE
Volkswagen AG is the parent company of the Volkswagen Group. It 
develops vehicles and components for the Group’s brands, but also 
produces and sells vehicles – in particular passenger cars and light 
commercial vehicles – under the Volkswagen Passenger Cars and  
Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles brands. In its function as parent 
company, Volkswagen AG holds direct or indirect interests in AUDI AG,  
SEAT S.A., ŠKODA AUTO a.s., Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG, Scania AB,  
MAN SE, Volkswagen Financial Services AG, Volkswagen Bank GmbH 
and a large number of other companies in Germany and abroad. More 
detailed disclosures are contained in the list of shareholdings required 
by HGB sections 285 and 313, which can be accessed on our website 
at www.volkswagen.com/en/ir and forms part of the annual financial 
statements. 
 
 
Volkswagen AG is a vertically integrated energy company within the 
meaning of section 3 para. 38 of the Energiewirtschaftsgesetz (EnWG – 
German Energy Industry Act) and is consequently subject to the  
provisions of the EnWG. In the electricity sector, Volkswagen AG is 
involved in electricity generation, sales and distribution, together with  
a Group subsidiary.
Volkswagen AG’s Board of Management is the body ultimately respon-
sible for managing the Group. The Supervisory Board appoints, moni-
tors and advises the Board of Management, and is directly consulted on 
decisions of fundamental significance for the Company.
SHAREHOLDER STRUCTURE
at December 31, 2017 in % of voting capital
State of Lower
Saxony 11.8
Qatar Holding LLC 14.6
German institutional
investors 2.7 
Porsche Automobil 
Holding SE 30.8
Foreign institutional
investors 24.5
Private shareholders/
Others 15.7
EMPLOYEES BY CONTINENT
at December 31, 2017 in %
Asia/Australia 16
America 9
Africa 1
Rest of Europe 29
Germany 45

Page 17
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
17
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  the VolkswAGeN GRoup stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  the VolkswAGeN GRoup
GROUP KEY FIGURES 
Volume data 2017 2016
Vehicle sales (units) in thousand 10,777 10,391
Vehicle production (units) in thousand 10,875 10,405
Research and development costs in €bn 13.1 13.7
Employees at Dec. 31. 642,292 626,715
Proportion of female employees in % 16.3 16.0 
Proportion of apprentices in % ¹ 4.6 4.6
Average hours of training per employee ³ 22.0 21.5
Average cost of training per employee in € ³ 1,261 1,276
CO? emissions European new car fleet in g/km ² 122 120
CO? emissions in kg/veh. ? 810  883
Energy consumption in kWh/veh. ? 2,068 2,090
 
Financial data (IFRS) in € million 2017 2016
Sales revenue 230,682 217,267
Operating result after special items 13,818 7,103
Earnings before tax 13,913 7,292
Earnings after tax 11,638 5,379
¹ At the Group in Germany.  
² Subject to official publication by the European Commission.  
³ Average for total Group workforce in the reporting period.
? Production of cars and light commercial vehicles, prior-year figures adjusted.
Matthias Müller 
Chairman of the Board of  
Management of Volkswagen  
Aktiengesellschaft
Dr. rer. pol. h.c.  
Francisco Javier  
Garcia Sanz 
Procurement
Dr. rer. soc. Karlheinz Blessing 
Human Resources and Organization
Andreas Renschler 
Commercial Vehicles
Prof. Dr. rer. pol. Dr.-Ing. E.h. Jochem Heizmann 
China
Prof. Rupert Stadler 
Chairman of the Board of 
Management of AUDI AG
Dr.-Ing. Herbert Diess 
Chairman of the Brand Board  
of Management of  
Volkswagen Passenger Cars
Hiltrud Dorothea Werner 
Integrity and Legal Affairs
Frank Witter 
Finance and Controlling

Page 18
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
18
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  the VolkswAGeN GRoup
PRODUCTS
The Volkswagen Group is one of the leading multibrand groups in the 
automotive industry. The Company’s business activities comprise the 
Automotive and Financial Services divisions. All brands in the Auto-
motive Division – with the exception of the Volkswagen Passenger Cars 
and Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles brands – are independent legal 
entities.  
The Automotive Division comprises the Passenger Cars, Commercial  
Vehicles and Power Engineering Business Areas. The Volkswagen 
Group’s passenger car brands are mostly consolidated in the Passenger 
Cars Business Area. This Business Area focuses primarily on developing 
vehicles and engines, producing and selling passenger cars, and dealing 
in original (genuine Volkswagen) parts. The product portfolio extends 
from fuel-efficient small cars through to luxury vehicles in the premi-
um segment, and also includes motorcycles, and will successively be 
supplemented by mobility services. 
The Commercial Vehicles Business Area focuses above all on the devel-
opment, production and sale of light commercial vehicles, trucks and 
buses under the Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles, Scania and MAN 
brands, supported by our original parts business and related services. 
Collaboration between commercial-vehicle brands MAN and Scania  
is managed and coordinated under the umbrella of Volkswagen  
Truck & Bus GmbH. The Commercial Vehicles Business Area’s portfolio 
ranges from pickups to heavy trucks and buses. 
The Power Engineering Business Area manages business activities 
involving large-bore diesel engines, turbomachinery, special gear units, 
propulsion components and testing systems. 
The activities of the Financial Services Division comprise dealer and 
customer financing, vehicle leasing, banking and insurance activities, 
as well as fleet management and Mobility offerings. 
With its brands, the Volkswagen Group has a presence in all relevant 
markets around the world, with Western Europe, China, the USA, Brazil 
and Mexico currently representing its key sales markets.
LOCATIONS AND EMPLOYEES
The Volkswagen Group’s production network is comprised of 120 loca-
tions in which passenger cars, commercial vehicles and motorcycles, 
as well as powertrains and components are manufactured.
With 71 locations, Europe remains our most important production 
region for vehicles and components. There are 28 sites in Germany 
alone. The Asia-Pacific region has 31 locations. We have five locations 
in North America and nine in South America. The Group operates four 
locations in Africa.
MARKETS
Despite difficult economic conditions, the Group – including our 
Chinese joint ventures – delivered a total of 10,741,455 cars and com-
mercial vehicles in 2017. The Group was able to maintain its strong 
competitive position in the reporting period thanks to a wide range of 
attractive and environmentally friendly vehicles. Worldwide, for the 
manufacture of its products, the Group purchased goods and services 
with a total value of €173.6 billion. This includes purchasing figures 
for our Chinese joint-venture companies. 
Further details of the Group’s development, holdings and changes 
affecting production locations or activities can be found in our 2017 
Annual Report.

Page 19
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
19
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  the VolkswAGeN GRoup stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  the VolkswAGeN VAlue chAiN
The Volkswagen Value Chain
RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
PROCUREMENT
MARKETING & SALES
PRODUCTION
AFTER-SALES & FINANCIAL SERVICES
RECYCLING
year for year, the Volkswagen Group invests more in research and development than any 
other automotive company in the world, laying the foundations for new models and 
innovative concepts with which to master the challenges of the future: digitalization, 
networking and electric mobility (e-mobility).
every working day, the Volkswagen Group manufactures an average of 43,000 vehicles. 
efficient production ranks alongside employee health and safety as one of our core goals. 
New concepts help prepare employees for the future, covering every step from vocational 
training onwards.
our service provision includes supporting dealerships to ensure they can provide quality 
advice and maintenance, managing our original parts business, and providing innovative 
vehicle-related financial services. Driver training courses in fuel-efficient driving play an 
effective part in cutting fuel consumption and thus co? emissions.
Recycling makes a key contribution to reducing our products’ impact on the environment and conserv-
ing resources. this is not just about recycling vehicles at the end of their useful life; recycling starts 
at the new-vehicle development stage, during which we pay close attention to the recyclability of the 
required materials, the use of high-quality recycled materials, and the avoidance of pollutants. At the 
same time, we factor in aspects of the use phase, for instance the treatment and disposal of service 
fluids and high-wear components.
every year, the Volkswagen Group purchases a wide range of raw materials, components 
and other goods. A sustainable supply chain and environmentally compatible transporta-
tion play key roles in our responsible and comprehensive championing of human rights, 
environmental protection and the battle against corruption.
the Volkswagen Group markets its vehicles in 153 countries. Around the world, comfort 
and safety are considered the key customer requirements. we continuously reduce our 
models’ fuel consumption and offer alternative mobility services.
120 
production sites 
on four continents  (2017)
19,520 
people attended Driving Experience  
eco-driving courses and test drives (2017)
End-of-life vehicles are 
85% recycled 
and 
95% recovered
173.6 € billion 
spent on procurement (2017) 
>10.7 million 
vehicles delivered worldwide (2017)
49,316 people 
are employed by the Volkswagen Group 
in Research & Development

Page 20
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
20
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  toGetheR – stRAteGy 2025
In 2016, the inception of TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 launched the 
biggest change process in the history of Volkswagen. Our new program 
for the future is making the Volkswagen Group more focused, efficient, 
innovative and sustainable – bringing us closer to our customers and 
setting us on a steady course of profitable growth. It defines the frame-
work and key building blocks of our vision – to become a world-leading 
provider of sustainable mobility.
Setting our sights on 2025 shows that we are thinking and acting  
long-term, looking forward to the future. The term “TOGETHER” de-
scribes the collective mindset within the Volkswagen Group, which will 
be even more important for our sustainable success going forward. 
With the help of this Group strategy, we in the Volkswagen Group are 
working together to thrill our customers with amazing vehicles and 
advanced, flexible mobility solutions – building a portfolio of strong 
brands that will meet their many different needs now and in the 
future. 
Every day, we assume and exercise responsibility for the environ-
ment, safety and society, as we seek to become a role model in these 
areas. Integrity, reliability, quality and passion are the cornerstones 
of our work. By pursuing these goals and principles, we strive for 
techno logical leadership in the industry, strengthen our competitive 
profitability and, at the same time, remain an excellent, safe and 
dependable employer.
The Code of Collaboration that forms part of our program for the  
future is the foundation on which our Group strategy rests. It describes 
how we cooperate within the Group and in our daily interactions, 
based on such core values as “open and honest”, “uncomplicated”, 
“without prejudice”, “on an equal footing” and “for one another”.
THE FOUR BUILDING BLOCKS OF OUR PROGRAM FOR 
THE FUTURE: TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025
Our Group strategy comprises a raft of far-reaching strategic decisions 
and practical initiatives, all essentially aiming to safeguard the Group’s 
long-term future and generate profitable growth. It comprises four 
building blocks, embracing a total of 16 strategic Group initiatives. 
The first building block is the transformation of our core automotive 
business. Developing, building and selling vehicles will remain essen-
tial for the Volkswagen Group going forward. However, there will be 
far-reaching and lasting changes to this business in the future. This is 
why we are comprehensively restructuring our core business for this 
new era of mobility. 
Establishing a new mobility solutions business is the second building 
block of our Group strategy. Within this business area, we are develop-
ing innovative and efficient mobility services that are also attractive, 
profitable and tailored to customer requirements – with the aim of be-
ing one of the leading provider in this growth market moving forward.
With the third building block, we are boosting the Group’s traditional 
innovative strengths and placing them on an even broader footing. 
This is necessary not only for the transformation of our core business, 
but also for building our new mobility services business. To this end, 
we are pushing ahead with the digital transformation of all parts of 
the Company. 
We aim to achieve lasting success in tomorrow’s world of mobility by evolving into a global leader 
in the provision of sustainable mobility. With this in mind, we have embedded our program for 
the future, TOGETHER – Strategy 2025, at the heart of our corporate activities.
TOGETHER – Strategy 2025
TOGETHER – STRATEGY 2025

Page 21
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
21
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  toGetheR – stRAteGy 2025 stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  toGetheR – stRAteGy 2025
Becoming one of the world’s leading providers of sustainable  mobility 
calls for substantial capital expenditure. This investment is to be 
funded primarily through efficiency gains along the entire value chain – 
from product development and sourcing through to production and 
distribution, as well as in our corporate support functions. We can 
also generate additional resources for future investments by optimiz-
ing our existing portfolio of brands and equity investments. Bringing 
us to the fourth building block of our Group strategy, which involves 
securely financing the Volkswagen Group and placing it on a solid 
footing. 
 
further information on sustainable Mobility in the Volkswagen Group  
can be found in our together.net magazine at:  
http://together.volkswagenag.com
GROUP STRATEGY GOALS AND KEY PERFORMANCE 
INDICATORS  
Our strategic initiatives describe how we intend to achieve our vision 
of becoming a world-leading provider of sustainable mobility. For this 
purpose, we have defined four target dimensions – thrilled customers;  
excellent employer; role model for the environment, safety and in-
tegrity; and competitive profitability – which are intended to help us 
grow sustainably.
These target dimensions apply across the Group. However, the strategic 
KPIs which we will use to measure our future progress in implement-
ing our Group strategy will differ according to business model. This is 
because our car-manufacturing brands have a different business model 
from our truck and bus brands, which in turn differs from the business 
models of our Power Engineering and service businesses.
Below we describe the Group strategic goals which have been assigned to 
each of the target dimensions.
The definitions of the strategic KPIs for the target dimension of com-
petitive profitability have been standardized and established across 
the Group. In some cases, however, the substance of the strategic KPIs 
for the other target dimensions is still being defined as we continue 
to flesh out our Group strategy.
TARGET DIMENSION: THRILLED CUSTOMERS
This target dimension focuses on the diverse needs of our customers  
and on tailor-made mobility solutions. We aspire to exceed our 
customers’ expectations and generate maximum customer benefit. 
This calls not only for the best products, the most efficient solutions 
and the best service, but also for flawless quality and an outstanding 
corporate image. We want to thrill our existing customers, win over 
new ones and retain their loyalty in the long term – because only loyal 
and faithful customers will recommend us to others.
Our strategic KPIs include the Net Promoter Score, conquest rate and 
key indicators for loyalty, customer satisfaction and retention.
 16 GROUP-WIDE INITIATIVES
 
SECURE FUNDING
STRENGTHEN 
INNOVATION POWER
BUILD 
MOBILITY SOLUTIONS 
BUSINESS
TRANSFORM 
CORE BUSINESS  
Drive digital transformation Create organisation 4.0 
Improve operational 
excellence
Optimize business
portfolio
Integrate strategy and
planning process
Establish
mobility solutions
business
Develop and expand
attractive and protable
smart mobility o?ering
Sharpen positioning of brands
Develop successful vehicle and drivetrain portfolio
Partner with regional players to win in economy segment
Streamline modular architectures 
Implement model line organization
Realign components business
Develop battery technology as new core competency
Develop self-driving system for autonomous vehicles and articial intelligence
Develop best-in-class user experience across brands and customer touchpoints

Page 22
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
22
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  toGetheR – stRAteGy 2025
TARGET DIMENSION: EXCELLENT EMPLOYER
Skilled and dedicated employees are one of the keys to sustainable 
success. We seek to boost our employees’ job satisfaction and motiva-
tion by offering equal opportunities, a modern and attractive working 
environment, and a forward-looking work organization. This offering 
is based on exemplary leadership and corporate culture, enabling us 
to retain our core workforce and attract new talent.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension cover internal employer 
attractiveness determined by means of the opinion survey, external 
employer attractiveness, an external employer ranking as well as a 
KPI pertaining to cross-brand exchange and rotation and the diversity 
index.
TARGET DIMENSION: ROLE MODEL FOR  
THE ENVIRONMENT, SAFETY AND INTEGRITY
Every day, we in the Volkswagen Group assume and exercise responsi-
bility for the environment, safety and society. This sense of responsi-
bility informs all our thoughts, actions and all the decisions we make, 
in equal measure.
We pay particular attention to the resources used and emissions gen-
erated by our product portfolio, as well as our locations and plants. 
Our goal is to continuously reduce our carbon footprint and lower 
our pollutant emissions. Through our innovations and outstanding 
quality, we seek to meet the highest standards of product safety. 
Our paramount principles include compliance with laws and regula-
tions, the establishment of safe, reliable processes, and open acknowl-
edgment of mistakes so they can be avoided or rectified in the future. 
In terms of integrity, Volkswagen aims to become the role model for a 
modern, transparent and successful enterprise.
The strategic KPIs of this target dimension include the decarbonization 
index, KPIs pertaining to emissions figures, as well as to compliance, 
process reliability and a culture of dealing openly with mistakes.  
TARGET DIMENSION: COMPETITIVE PROFITABILITY
Investors judge us by whether we are able to meet our obligations 
with respect to interest payments and debt repayments. As equity 
holders, they expect suitable dividends and a lasting increase in the 
value of their shares.
We make investments with a view to achieving profitable growth and 
strengthening our competitiveness, thereby keeping the Volkswagen 
Group on a firm footing and ensuring it remains an attractive invest-
ment option.
To achieve operational excellence in all business processes, and to 
become an industry benchmark – those are the goals we have set 
ourselves.
Here, our strategic KPIs are operationalized for internal management 
purposes: target and actual data are derived from Volkswagen Group 
figures.
STRATEGIC KPIS:  
COMPETITIVE PROFITABILITY
2015 2025
operating return on sales* 6.0% 7 to 8%
Research and development 
ratio (R&D ratio) in the  
Automotive Division
7.4% ~ 6%
capex/sales revenue in the 
Automotive Division
6.9% ~ 6%
Net cash flow in the  
Automotive Division
€ 8,887 million positive, to allow a 
distribution ratio of 
30%
Net liquidity in the Automotive 
Division
€ 24,522 million ~ 10% of consolidated 
sales revenue
Return on investment (Roi) in 
the Automotive Division
– 0.2% > 15%
* 2015 before special items.

Page 23
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
23
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  toGetheR – stRAteGy 2025 stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  custoMeR sAtisfActioN AND custoMeR loyAlty  
Customer Satisfaction 
and Customer Loyalty  
As part of our future program, we have developed a sales and market-
ing strategy aimed at inspiring customers on a whole new level under 
the slogan “customer delight”. We regard ourselves as an innovative 
and sustainable mobility provider for all commercial and private 
customers worldwide – with a unique product portfolio encompassing 
twelves successful brands and innovative financial services.
We will implement the TOGETHER sales strategy step by step over 
the coming years. In the focus area of new sales, for example, we are 
realizing innovative sales and service strategies together with our 
sales partners. In the focus area of the customer ecosystem, we are 
implementing platforms for a seamless digital brand experience at 
all customer touchpoints – this is enabling us to meet ever-grow-
ing customer expectations as well as increased data protection 
standards. In the focus area of steering, we are optimizing how our 
brands capitalize profitably on market opportunities. 
Optimal coverage of markets, customer segments and customer bud-
gets are at the heart of a strategic Group initiative. To this end, we are 
establishing automobile-specific customer segmentation to steer the 
positioning of our brands. At the same time, we are examining global 
markets for potential revenue sources. In 2017, we rolled out this 
methodology in Europe and China and agreed on the region-specific, 
customer-oriented brand territories for product positioning. From 
2018, the new methodology will be applied in the Volkswagen Group’s 
product processes; other brands will also be included.
The Volkswagen Group aims its sales activities at inspiring its cus-
tomers. This is our top priority, as enthusiastic customers remain 
loyal to our brands and recommend our products and services to 
others. In addition to satisfaction with our products and services, we  
value our customers’ emotional connection to our brands. It is im-
portant for us to retain customers and win new ones. To measure 
our success in this area, we collect data on and analyze three strategic 
indicators for the major passenger car-producing brands:
 § Net promoter score: Proportion of customers who would recom-
mend us to others minus the proportion of customers who would 
not recommend us. In terms of customers’ willingness to recom-
mend them, Porsche and ŠKODA lead the core European markets 
when compared to other Group brands and competitors.
 § Loyalty rate: Proportion of customers of our car brands who have 
bought another Group model. The loyalty of Volkswagen Passenger 
Cars, Audi, Porsche and ŠKODA customers has kept these brands 
in the upper loyalty rankings in comparison with competitors for 
a number of years. Compared to other manufacturer groups, the 
Volkswagen Group therefore holds the top spot, with a considerable 
margin over the competition.
 § Conquest rate: Newly acquired passenger car customers as a propor-
tion of all potential new customers. Here, too, we have a top ranking, 
primarily thanks to the good scores for the Volkswagen Passenger 
Cars brand. 
The downward trend in brand image and brand trust at the Volkswagen 
Passenger Cars brand following the diesel issue did not continue in 
2017. Instead, the first signs of recovery were evident. Porsche remains 
in top position in the image ranking.
We also use a strategic indicator to measure the satisfaction of cus-
tomers with our products and services in the truck and bus business:
 § Customer satisfaction: In the markets relevant for the Volkswagen 
Group, we aim to be one of the industry leaders in terms of the 
satisfaction rate for our commercial vehicle brands. To evaluate 
these criteria, we use customer satisfaction studies, which delivered 
positive satisfaction figures in line with our targets in the report-
ing period. 
In the financial services business, we use two strategic indicators:
 § Customer satisfaction: In addition to looking at customer satisfac-
tion with our products, we measure this by examining reviews of 
our service staff; both aspects are an indicator for our customer and 
service focus. The results continued their positive trend in 2017. 
To achieve our goal of very high customer satisfaction throughout 
the Financial Services Division by 2025, we regularly evaluate what 
action is needed and how ideas can be shared and implemented 
across different countries.
 § Customer loyalty: Trust in and loyalty to our services rely on cus-
tomer satisfaction with our product range and service. The loyalty 
scores that are regularly calculated based on product sales to our 
customers are impressive proof of customers’ trust in our financial 
services. Ambitious targets underscore the focus on customers and 
fulfilling their needs at Volkswagen Financial Services. 

Page 24
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
24
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  custoMeR sAtisfActioN AND custoMeR loyAlty  
E-MOBILITY AND DIGITALIZATION IN GROUP SALES
By 2025, as part of our Roadmap E, we plan to offer our customers 
around the world more than 80 new electric models, including some 
50 pure battery-driven vehicles and 30 plug-in hybrids. This campaign 
will be complemented by vehicle-related, customer-focused offers, 
such as customized charging infrastructure solutions and mobile  
online services. This is turning the Volkswagen Group from an 
automotive manufacturer into a mobility service provider, posing 
completely new sales challenges.
We are making highly targeted use of the opportunities of digitali-
zation in sales. Our actions are guided by a clearly defined strategy 
that requires extensive cooperation between the brands to achieve 
the greatest possible synergies. Our aim here is to create a completely 
new product experience for our customers – one which is impressive 
with its seamless customer communications, from the initial interest 
in purchasing a vehicle, to servicing, and ultimately to the sale of the 
used car. In the process, we are thus opening up new business models 
and opportunities in every aspect of the connected vehicle – in par-
ticular mobility and other services. Vehicles are becoming an integral 
part of the customer’s digital world of experience. We take great care to 
make all processes transparent so that customers always retain control 
of their own data.
We also gear our internal processes and structures to the pace of 
digital innovation. The result is project teams operating across 
different business areas, new forms of cooperation, a more intensive 
relationship with the international start-up scene, a consolidation of 
venture capital expertise – as a form of supporting innovative ideas 
and business models – as well as new lean systems and cloud-based 
IT solutions.
FLEET CUSTOMER BUSINESS  
Our business relationships with fleet customers are often long-term 
partnerships. In a volatile environment, this customer group guaran-
tees more stable vehicle sales than the private customer segment.
The Volkswagen Group has an established base of business fleet 
customers in Germany and the rest of Europe in particular. Our ex-
tensive product range enables us to satisfy their individual mobility 
needs from a single source.
In fiscal year 2017, the share of fleet customers in total registrations 
in Germany remained stable at 14.1% (14.1%) amid a 2.7% growth in 
the market. The Volkswagen Group’s share of this customer segment 
decreased to 44.7% (47.1%). Outside Germany, we recorded growth 
in the Group’s share of registrations by fleet customers in Europe to 
25.2% (24.5%). On the whole, the Volkswagen Group’s share in Europe 
remained constant at 28.9% (28.9%). This shows that fleet customers 
still have considerable confidence in the Group.
AFTER SALES AND SERVICE 
In addition to individual service, the timely provision of genuine 
parts is essential in ensuring passenger car customer satisfaction in 
After Sales. The genuine parts supplied by our passenger cars brands 
and the expertise of the service centers represent the highest level of 
quality and ensure the safety and value retention of our customers’ 
vehicles. With our global after-sales network including more than  
120 of our own warehouses, we ensure that almost all our authorized 
service facilities around the world can be supplied within 24 hours. 
We regard ourselves as a complete provider of all products and ser-
vices relevant to customers in the after-sales business. Together with 
our partners, we ensure the worldwide mobility of our customers. The 
partner businesses offer the entire portfolio of services in all vehicle 
classes. We are continuously expanding our range of tailored services 
in order to improve convenience for our customers and increase 
customer satisfaction.
Around the world, our commercial vehicles business also prides itself 
on products of the highest quality and on strong customer focus. Our 
range of trucks, buses and engines is complemented by services that 
guarantee fuel efficiency, reliability and good vehicle availability. The 
workshop service and service contracts offer customers a high degree 
of certainty in addition to high quality. We are reducing servicing 
times and costs with a view to reducing vehicles’ total operating costs 
and helping them retain their value. 
In the Power Engineering segment, we help our customers ensure the 
availability of machinery with MAN PrimeServ. The global network 
of more than 100 PrimeServ locations guarantees excellent customer 
focus and offers, among other things, replacement parts of genuine 
parts quality, qualified technical service and long-term maintenance 
contracts.

Page 25
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
25
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  custoMeR sAtisfActioN AND custoMeR loyAlty  stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble Mobility
It is our task to ensure responsible and efficient production, and to 
make mobility not only as safe, convenient and environmentally com-
patible as possible, but also affordable for large numbers of people. 
We have firmly established e-mobility as a key action area in our 
TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 program for the future – while at the same 
time setting out our goal of becoming one of the world’s leading 
providers of e-mobility by 2025. Coupled with e-mobility and auto-
nomous driving, digitalization will transform our business – with 
implications of which many people are not yet aware. 
As we work to develop pioneering mobility solutions, we do not limit 
our focus to automotive mobility, but also consider other modes of 
transportation, as well as issues such as urbanization, urban develop-
ment, traffic-related services and the quality of transport infrastructure. 
We also take account of trending demands, such as vehicle-sharing. For 
these reasons, we have embedded new mobility solutions and digital 
services as core elements in our TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 program. 
By 2025, we intend to generate a proportion of our revenues from 
mobility solutions. With the Volkswagen Group’s new company for 
mobility services, MOIA, we are laying the foundations of lasting suc-
cess in tomorrow’s world of mobility – across the Group, and across 
all our brands. MOIA develops and markets its own mobility services, 
either independently or in partnership with cities and existing trans-
port systems. In parallel with MOIA, the brands continue to move 
forward with their own specific services. 
We are working on other innovative mobility concepts as part of 
the #WolfsburgDigital initiative. We recently made our on-demand 
X-Shuttle service available to our employees. Five modified Volkswagen 
Crafters transport commuters between our Braunschweig and Wolfs-
burg sites – they even provide a traveling concierge service. Group em-
ployees can use a smartphone app to specify their pickup location and 
destination and book the shuttle digitally. An algorithm combines the 
commuters’ requests, figures out optimal routes, and calculates travel 
and arrival times for each passenger. And the X-Shuttle service offers 
additional benefits – parcel and laundry services, snacks and drinks, 
free Wi-Fi and smartphone charging ports. X-Shuttle is more than just 
a ridesharing service; it is a pilot for future concepts in urban mobility 
and conceivably the future of carpooling. 
In the future, autonomous vehicles will enrich many people’s 
mobility experience. A mobility concept based on heavily used 
autonomous vehicles will take up less space, consume less energy, 
and be significantly safer and more sustainable. With SEDRIC (for 
SElf-DRIving Car), not only have we created precisely such an innova-
tive, integrated mobility concept for the urban traffic of the future, 
we have also developed a totally new kind of concept car. SEDRIC is 
a cross-brand ideas platform for our Group. It features an intuitive 
control system that gives an entirely new meaning to the idea of 
autonomous driving. The touch of a button, a verbal command or a 
smartphone app is enough to summon the self-driving automobile, 
which then delivers its passengers conveniently, reliably and safely to 
their destinations.
further information on the X-shuttle can be found at: 
https://www.volkswagenag.com/en/news/stories/2017/06/ 
the-car-pool-of-the-future.html
Sustainable Mobility
MOIA
Just one year after its inception, MOIA has introduced an in-
tegrated ride-pooling concept with a mission: “One Million 
Cars off the Road”. Starting in 2018, the initiative will provide 
new mobility options aimed at significantly reducing traffic 
in cities. We will launch this mobility service in 2018, initially 
in Hamburg.
MOIA has been testing the service in Hanover since October 
2017 and is continuously developing the various components 
based on real-world operation. A fleet of 20 Volkswagen  
Multivans is currently being used for the tests. 
Thanks to the MOIA ridesharing vehicle we introduced in 
December 2017, we can now cover the entire ride-pooling 
value chain – or just individual links in the chain, as required.
 
further information on MoiA can be found at:  
https://www.moia.io

Page 26
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
26
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble Mobility
Starting in 2018, in a further step along the road to a new world 
of digitized mobility, we are planning to join forces with Israeli 
company Mobileye to implement a new navigation standard for 
automated driving. Future Volkswagen models will use Mobileye’s 
Road Experience Management™ (REM™) camera-based mapping and 
localization technology. 
 
However, the economic, social and environmental requirements our 
mobility solutions must satisfy often contain a number of inherent-
ly conflicting goals. Whenever we fail to achieve a balance between 
economic, social and environmental objectives, long-term risks 
emerge both for our stakeholders and for the financial success of 
our Group. Some examples of such conflicting goals include:
 § Individual mobility solutions facilitate participation in society and 
individual autonomy. In the future, many people will still want to 
run their own cars – despite the steadily increasing availability of 
innovative mobility concepts. This is particularly true of the growing 
consumer markets in emerging and developing countries, as well as 
sparsely populated regions. However, the desire for individual mobil-
ity also contributes to increased consumption of natural resources 
and accelerates the process of anthropogenic climate change.
further information on seDRic can be found at: 
http://www.discover-sedric.com/en/ 
further information on the strategic partnership between Volkswagen and  
Mobileye can be found at: https://www.volkswagen-media-services.com/en/
 § The market success of SUVs underscores the attractiveness of 
Volkswagen products. Fulfilling these existing customer wishes 
safeguards the business success of our Group and provides job 
security for our employees. But the higher fuel consumption of SUVs 
compared with other vehicle models makes it more difficult for us to 
meet the climate targets we have set ourselves.
 § Government legislation, and especially changes to regulations 
governing CO? emissions, have made ecologically driven structural 
change inevitable. However, this far-reaching change poses a chal-
lenge to existing production methods and workforce qualifications. 
At the same time, the shift toward e-mobility and the associated 
investments in production capacity are also generating new employ-
ment opportunities.
 § Electric mobility also raises new environmental questions, such as 
how to measure the environmental impact of electric and hybrid 
vehicles compared with conventional vehicles in terms of the use of 
mineral resources in production and the recycling of battery cells at 
the end of the product life cycle.
 § Automated vehicles and new mobility services offer more 
convenience, enhance road safety, and encourage optimization 
of transport and traffic systems, especially in heavily populated 
urban areas. The new demand for collective mobility is creating a 
new competitive environment with brand-new players, to which 
we must continually adapt.
 § Connected driving and digitalization depend on data sharing 
and big data analysis, but we must also comply with legislation 
governing personal data protection. Before automated mobility 
can succeed, we need to clarify a large number of ethical and legal 
questions.
VOLKSWAGEN SUSTAINABILITY CYCLE
Employment
Cultural change
Integrity
Compliance Conict minerals
Life cycle Transparency
Customer wishes
Recycling
Stakeholders
Industry 4.0
Lightweight design
Concept vehicles
Ride hailing
Robotaxis
Autonomous driving
Algorithms
Mobility on demand 
Elektric drives
Natura-gas drives
Hybrid drives
Software
Shuttle-pooling service
Return on sales
SUSTAINABLE 
TECHNOLOGY
SUSTAINABLE 
APPLICATIONS
SUSTAINABLE 
COMPANY
the MoiA vehicle is the world’s only electric ride-pooling six-seater. 
Although nearly ready for production, the concept vehicle is not yet 
available for sale, so is not subject to eu Directive 1999/94 ec.
putting a new face on ride-pooling, the MoiA vehicle is 
all-electric, eco-friendly, and has enough room for six 
passengers.

Page 27
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
27
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble Mobility stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
Sustainable 
Management
Our aim is to operate responsibly along the entire value chain. This 
means our corporate governance must be sustainable and transparent 
to its core. 
Largely in line with the recommendations of the German Corporate 
Governance Code, we practice Group-wide sustainability coordina-
tion, integrated compliance and risk management, the continued 
development of a culture of integrity, and responsible supply chain 
management. The forward-thinking handling of environmental is-
sues, responsibility toward our employees and social engagement by 
our brands and in the various regions provide the framework for our 
Group’s sustainability approach. The greatest challenge to effective 
sustainability management is our complexity, with our 12 brands, 
more than 640,000 employees and 120 production sites.
Voluntary undertakings and principles applied across the Group form 
the basis and backbone of our sustainability management. These 
include our Model of Sustainable Development, our stakeholder guide-
lines and our corporate guidelines.
The Model of Sustainable Development provides a benchmark for 
sustainable corporate policy with three key elements:
 § a lasting balance between economic, environmental and social 
systems and our efforts to achieve long-term equilibrium between 
divergent interests,
 § responsibility for our own actions at regional, national and global 
level, with
 § transparent communications and fair cooperation. 
COORDINATION OF SUSTAINABILITY
We have created a clear structure for coordinating our sustainability 
activities that includes internal and external sustainability committees.
Our internal sustainability coordination is based on the tight inte-
gration of our corporate and sustainability strategies. In 2017, in its 
function as our Sustainability Board, the Group Board of Management 
under the leadership of CEO Matthias Müller regularly worked on the 
strategic issues surrounding a holistic sustainability management 
approach.
The Corporate Sustainability Steering Committee regularly updates 
the Group Board of Management on issues of relevance to sustain-
ability. The steering committee includes top managers from corporate 
functions, as well as representatives of the Group Works Council and 
brands. Its tasks include defining strategic sustainability goals and 
position statements, identifying key action areas and approving the 
sustainability report. Management indicators are used to monitor the 
extent to which these sustainability goals are being met. The steering 
committee meets regularly under the leadership of the external affairs 
and sustainability function.
In turn, the steering committee is supported by the sustainability office. 
Its duties include coordinating all sustainability-related activities with-
in the Group and the brands. The office also handles the monitoring 
and coordination of sustainability ratings. Finally, it is responsible for 
drawing up the sustainability report and supporting the Sustainability 
Council and its workshops.
As part of the environmental and socio-political regulatory process, 
we also maintain an ongoing dialog with policymakers.
At divisional level, the CSR project team ensures that information on 
current projects is regularly shared between the various sustainability 
experts within the Group. In addition, other project teams work across 
business areas on topics such as reporting, stakeholder management 
and sustainability in supplier relations. These coordination and work-
ing structures have also been established across the brands and are 
subject to ongoing development. 
In our efforts to continuously improve our sustainability concept, we 
have set up two external committees to provide us with independent 
advice: the Sustainability Council and the Stakeholder Panel.
Appointed in 2016, the international Sustainability Council regularly 
consults with the Board of Management, senior managers and em-
ployee representatives. It is authorized to proactively propose topics 
and implement projects subject to prior agreement. Its first projects 
included an investigation of innovation and cultural change related 
to sustainable mobility, an international initiative related to crisis 
prevention as a consequence of climate change, and a scientific study 
on defining the future parameters of transportation and climate 
policy. More detailed information on the council’s members and 
activities can be found here: www.volkswagenag.com > Sustainability 
> Sustainability Council.

Page 28
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
28
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
In cooperation with experts in the field, we set up a Stakeholder Panel 
that has kept track of our sustainability reporting in particular over 
the past 20 years and provided a critical commentary. In 2017, the 
panel included some 200 national and international stakeholders 
from government, academia and research, the financial markets and 
civil society. We regularly conduct interviews and apply the findings 
in order to refine our understanding of our external stakeholders’ 
expectations.
MATERIALITY ANALYSIS 
GRi 102-43, 102-44, 102-46, 102-49
Our approach to the analysis and identification of significant issues is 
as follows:
1. Based on various global challenges, we drew up a list of 18 key 
action areas. We did this on the basis of the following sources: 
external studies, industry analyses and our brands’ stakeholder 
surveys, as well as internal guidelines such as the Group-wide 
TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 and the individual strategies of our 
divisions. These action areas were largely defined on the basis 
of the findings of expert workshops held in the past addressing 
topics related to the economy, the environment and civil society.
2. In August, “Group Guideline No. 25: Sustainability Reporting” 
was approved by the Group Board of Management. This policy 
regulates organization and responsibilities, and also defines the 
process for the annual materiality analysis. 
3. The changeover to the new sustainability reporting framework of 
the Global Reporting Initiative – the GRI Standards –, which will 
become mandatory in July 2018, was carried out in cooperation 
with external experts. 
4. Following our evaluation of the modified reporting requirements 
and in line with the strategic approach of TOGETHER – Strategy 
2025, we have expanded our materiality analysis. Going forward, 
we will further intensify our focus on a holistic approach to 
sustainability which takes account of the Group perspective, the 
perceptions of our stakeholders, and the environmental, economic 
and social impacts of our business. For this reason, as a first step, 
we have decided to extend our key action areas to include the 
issues of integrity and human rights.
5. The 18 action areas identified by the Volkswagen Group were 
evaluated in terms of their strategic importance for TOGETHER – 
Strategy 2025 and their stakeholder relevance. 
6. In 2017, the implications of CSR-RUG (for the disclosure of 
nonfinancial information) and of the new GRI standards were 
discussed with representatives of the brands and corporate func-
tions in four workshops, and subsequently reconciled with our 
divisional strategies. 
7. Furthermore, in the Group CSR Meeting (GCM), we discussed the 
importance of taking an “impact perspective” when evaluating 
the action areas for our Group.
 
The outcome of this systematic materiality process was that, due to 
our size, our impacts and our resulting responsibilities, all minimum 
disclosure requirements under CSR-RUG were once again identified as 
material. This also applies to all topics defined as “material” by the GRI 
Standards of the Global Reporting Initiative. The graphic below shows 
our material action areas in line with CSR-RUG and the GRI Standards:

Page 29
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
29
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP’S KEY ACTION AREAS IN LINE WITH CSR-RUG AND THE GRI STANDARDS
GRi 102-46, 102-47, 102-49
STRATEGY AND 
MANAGEMENT
ONE OF THE WORLD’S 
LEADING PRODIVERS 
OF SUSTAINABLE MOBILITY
PRODUCTS AND
PRODUCTION
PEOPLE AND
RESPONSIBILITY
COMPLIANCE, 
RISK MANAGEMENT, 
GOVERNANCE
HUMAN RIGHTS
HEALTH AND 
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY
TRAINING
CORPORATE RESPONSIBILITY
ZERO IMPACT 
MOBILITY
ENVIRONMENTALLY FRIENDLY 
PRODUCTS
NATURE CONSERVATION 
AND BIODIVERSITY
CLIMATE PROTECTION AND 
DECARBONIZATION
CUSTOMER SATISFACTION
STABILITY AND 
PROFITABILITY
PRODUCT AND 
TRANSPORT SAFETY
SUPPLIER MANAGEMENT
RESOURCE CONSERVATION 
THROUGHOUT LIFE CYCLEATTRACTIVENESS 
AS AN EMPLOYER
PARTICIPATION AND 
CODETERMINATION
DIVERSITY AND 
EQUALITY
INTEGRITY

Page 30
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
30
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
DESK RESEARCH ON STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES* 
GRi 102-44, 102-46, 102-47, 102-49
Action areas NGOs 
(environmental)
Transport 
associations
NGOs 
(social welfare)
Labor  
unions
Policymakers/
govt. agencies 
(Germany)
SRI analysts Standard 
setters
Economy compliance, risk man-
agement, governance
supplier relations
customer satisfaction
Quality/vehicle safety
stability and 
profitability
People employer attractiveness 
participation/ 
co-determination 
social responsibility
health
training and professional 
development
Diversity and equal 
opportunities
Environment smart mobility and 
connectivity
climate protection/
decarbonization
environmental  
protection and 
nature conservation
Resource conservation 
throughout life cycle
environmentally friendly 
products/electrification
Main topic
secondary topic
Not addressed
The specific content of the action areas in terms of objectives, values 
and indicators is still being fleshed out as part of the implementation 
of our new Group strategy. 
Our relationships with our stakeholders, as well as their requirements, 
expectations and attitudes, are of fundamental importance in identi-
fying issues of material significance for the Volkswagen Group. For this 
reason, in addition to our established Stakeholder Panel and the stake-
holder surveys carried out by the Group companies, we have worked 
with other internal and external representatives to further refine our 
key action areas.
The graphic below shows the Group’s most important action areas in 
the view of our stakeholders. Our desk research focused on the inter-
ests of more than 40 national and international stakeholder groups 
whose concerns formed part of a multi-stage analysis which informed 
the identification of our action areas:
* This analysis is based on the action areas defined in 2015 and stakeholder perspectives at that time.

Page 31
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
31
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
In view of our broad international standing, we have deliberately 
avoided any prioritization of these action areas. On the one hand, the 
relevance of the individual areas may vary by region; on the other 
hand, we do not wish to judge, for example, whether the health of over 
640,000 employees worldwide is more important than, for example, 
resource conservation throughout the vehicle life cycle – or vice versa. 
As we understand it, sustainable development means taking equal 
account of economic, environmental and social interests and main-
taining an appropriate balance between them.
STRATEGIC STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT 
GRi 102-40, 102-42, 102-43, 102-44, 102-46
As an automobile manufacturer with 12 brands and 120 production 
sites, offering vehicles in 153 countries, we are confronted with a 
broad spectrum of requirements, expectations and attitudes on a 
daily basis. In addition to the opportunities presented by our rela-
tionships with our stakeholders, this diversity of interests is also a 
challenge, because it can result in conflicting objectives.
Stakeholders are individuals, groups or organizations who influence 
or are influenced by our corporate decision-making processes and/
or their outcomes. At the center of our stakeholder universe are our 
customers and employees. Based on those with whom we regularly 
come into contact, we have identified 12 additional stakeholder groups 
surrounding this core, all of whom are given equal priority.
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP STAKEHOLDERS
GRi 102-40
1
2 3
Volkswagen 
Group
CUSTOMERS
EMPLOYEES
SOCIETY
POLITICSBUSINESS
ACADEMIA MEDIA
Religious institutions
Government agencies & authorities
Trade unions
Investors and analysts
Researchers & experts Media organizations
Business partners
Competitors
NGOs/charitable 
organizations
Residents & local authorities
Cultural & 
educational institutions
Clubs and associations

Page 32
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
32
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
In the 2017 reporting year, our stakeholders took advantage of surveys 
and dialog events to communicate numerous expectations to the 
Volkswagen Group:
We have a strategic stakeholder management system in place to help 
us organize our many different stakeholders and their needs, and 
ensure they are included in our business decisions. To successfully 
facilitate a dialog of equals, our stakeholder management system 
must meet the following criteria:
 § Systematically recording the expectations placed on Volkswagen
 § Productively sharing the knowledge of all parties involved
 § Jointly developing solutions to problems
 § Making our decision-making processes transparent 
Successful stakeholder management requires systematic and strategic 
planning, implementation and monitoring of our activities. With this 
in mind, we restructured our stakeholder management system in the 
2017 reporting year: 
 § Planning and Governance: Our brands and divisions are responsi-
ble for maintaining direct contact with our stakeholder groups. We 
combine and manage the resulting commitments at Group level 
(sustainability management).
 § Standardization: Our stakeholder management is guided by 
the standards established at many different levels of regulation 
(policies).
 § Partnerships: At Group level, our work with selected stakeholders 
takes the form of strategic partnerships. An overview of our partner-
ships can be found in the Supplementary Information. 
 § Participation: We see our stakeholders as partners and involve 
them in our decision-making processes. In addition to the strong 
culture of co-determination at Volkswagen, the activities of our 
Group Sustainability Council should also be mentioned here.
 § Consultation: An overview of our programs and initiatives for dia-
log and interaction can be found in the Supplementary Information. 
Information received from NGOs may also prompt us to initiate 
discussions and examine opportunities for cooperation.
 § Evaluation: Each year, we collect feedback from our stakeholders 
through our Stakeholder Panel and our stakeholder surveys.  
The results of our 2017 reputation study can be found in the  
Supplementary Information.
 §  Documentation and Communication: Our Sustainability Report is 
our primary medium for documenting our activities, supplemented 
by Shift, our sustainability magazine. We regularly provide addition-
al information on current projects in press releases and newsletters 
and on social media. 
STAKEHOLDER SUGGESTIONS AND VOLKSWAGEN AG RESPONSES 
GRi 102-43, 102-44
Topics Stakeholders Volkswagen AG
sustainability management incorporate sustainability strategy into 
corporate strategy
toGetheR – strategy 2025
 § Vision: sustainable Mobility
 § sustainable Growth:  
we thrill our customers with tailor-made 
mobility solutions and serve their diverse 
needs with a portfolio of strong brands. we 
assume and exercise responsibility for the 
environment, safety and social issues. we 
act with integrity and build on reliability, 
quality and passion as the foundation stones 
of our work
integrity and governance place integrity and technological competence  
on an equal footing
 § creation of the position of board Member for 
integrity and legal Affairs
 § toGetheR – strategy 2025:  
Model of integrity
 § Multilingual integrity program
Greenhouse-gas and pollutant emissions close the gap between emissions in the lab  
and on the road
 § toGetheR – strategy 2025:  
carbon footprint kpi
 § electrification
 § Volkswagen welcomes the introduction of 
RDe and wltp, as both testing methods 
will help close the gap between emissions 
measured in the lab and under real driving 
conditions.
communicating sustainability identify and communicate 
conflicting objectives
 § shift sustainability magazine provides  
critical self-scrutiny and dialog
 § Decision-making processes are informed  
by regular stakeholder surveys and dialog 
event
corporate strategy kpis for transformation into 
mobility services provider
 § Development of new kpis as part of  
toGetheR – strategy 2025

Page 33
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
33
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
STAKEHOLDER MANAGEMENT AT VOLKSWAGEN – A HOLISTIC APPROACH 
GRi 102-42, 102-43, 102-44
We take 
responsibility, 
together with our 
stakeholders
PLANNING & 
MANAGEMENT
DOCUMENTATION & 
COMMUNICATION 
ST
AN
DA
RD
IZ
AT
IO
N
St
an
da
rd
iza
tio
n 
th
ro
ug
h 
gu
id
in
g 
pr
in
cip
le
s a
nd
 
gu
id
el
in
es
Goals and social engagement 
requirements derived from 
corporate strategy
Close, trust-based collaboration 
through partnership programs, 
memberships and multi-stakeholder 
initiatives
COOPERATION
STRATEGY
EVALUATION
System
atic m
onitoring 
and review
 of goal 
attainm
ent; identi?cation 
and evaluation of 
stakeholder interests
O?ering dialogue opportuni-
ties through events, lectures, 
sym
posia, w
orkshops and 
other channelsCONSULTATION
In
st
itu
tio
na
liz
ed
 co
-d
et
er
m
in
a-
tio
n 
th
ro
ug
h 
pr
oj
ec
ts
, a
dv
iso
ry
 
bo
di
es
 a
nd
 p
ar
tic
ip
at
or
y c
ul
tu
re
PA
RT
IC
IP
AT
IO
N

Page 34
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
34
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
In the 2017 reporting year, two examples of platforms for stakeholder 
communication were the Stakeholder Panel Dialog and the 2017  
Global Stakeholder Reputation Survey. 
We invite the members of our Stakeholder Panel to Stakeholder Dialog 
events at regular intervals. Stakeholder Panel Dialog events provide 
a format for coming together to openly and critically discuss current 
Group initiatives. In the 2017 reporting year, two of these events took 
place in our offices in Hanover (June) and Berlin (December). In each 
case, we discussed topics such as further steps in the implementation 
of our corporate strategy TOGETHER – Strategy 2025, the Volkswagen  
Group’s e-mobility initiatives, the ongoing development of our 
materiality analysis, and the scope and contents of our nonfinancial 
reporting with between 20 and 30 panel members. 
We also conducted our 2017 Global Stakeholder Reputation Survey in 
the reporting year, in collaboration with an opinion polling service 
provider. In Germany, the USA and China, a total of 300 opinion 
leaders representing research and academia, civil society, the media, 
government and financial markets were surveyed. The survey was 
designed by reference to our TOGETHER strategy and the Volkswagen 
Code of Values, as well as an analysis of material issues as required for 
our sustainability reporting. The results showed that along with prod-
uct perception, our stakeholders believe that corporate culture, values 
and integrity, as well as corporate governance, all play an important 
role in the building of trust. And in their view, this is precisely where 
further action is needed.
 
OVERVIEW OF THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP’S STAKEHOLDER DIALOG FORUMS
GRi 102-43, 102-44
Stakeholder round tables Stakeholder workshops Stakeholder Panel Dialog events Stakeholder surveys Partnerships with universities
small groups 
(4–6 stakeholders)
Medium groups 
(10–15 stakeholders)
large groups (30 stakeholders) large representative samples Visiting professors and lecturers
several times per year  
(e.g. in berlin)
internal and external speakers twice a year 
(hanover and berlin)
2017 Global Reputation survey 
(500 stakeholders)
several times per year  
(e.g. in osnabruck)
Discussions with senior  
management and Group  
sustainability council
Discussions with senior and 
middle management
internal and external speakers 2017 Group Materiality survey 
(30 stakeholders) 
sponsorship of events
Discussions with senior and 
middle management

Page 35
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
35
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
ACTION PLAN – STRATEGY AND MANAGEMENT
Action areas Goals and actions Deadline Status
stability & profitability secure funding and strengthen innovation power 2025 New
operating return on sales: 7–8% 2025 New
Return on investment for the Automotive Division: > 15% 2025 –0.2% (2015)
Ratio of capex to sales revenue in the Automotive 
Division: ~ 6%
2025 6.9% (2015)
Research and development (R&D) ratio in the  
Automotive Division: ~ 6%
2025 7.4% (2015)
Net cash flow in the Automotive Division: 
positive, to allow a target distribution ratio 
of 30%
2025 € 8,887 million (2015)
Net liquidity in the Automotive Division:  
~ 10% of consolidated sales revenue
2025 € 24,522 million,
11.5% (2015)
Risk management operation and further development of risk management 
and internal control systems (RMs/ics) in operating 
business units
ongoing support for operating business units to further 
develop RMs/ics (e.g. in Volkswagen brand’s 
development of powertrains; in training courses 
on defining and documenting internal controls for 
technical development)
standardize and further develop risk management 
methods and risk management and internal control 
processes to safeguard the future viability of the  
Volkswagen Group
ongoing strengthening of quarterly risk reporting process 
across all Volkswagen AG executive functions by 
further enhancing relevance of risk management; 
further development of GRc it system to ensure 
consistent, standardized risk reporting
strengthen networking of risk management  
organization and activities between brands
ongoing All Group brands now involved in regular sharing 
of information on risk management, network 
meetings; risk management wiki as information 
and idea sharing platform for GRc organization
integrity integrity program: mandatory participation in web-based 
training program for all non-managerial employees; 
additional objectives currently in development 
2018 Rollout of tools for integrity program; development 
of kpis for regular integrity monitoring
compliance further deepen awareness and culture of compliance ongoing information supplied to specific target groups 
via different media across multiple brands and 
companies
continuous optimization of compliance Management 
system (cMs)
ongoing further development of cMs taking account 
of international legislation and internal Group 
benchmarks
continue to develop and conduct Group-wide 
compliance training courses
ongoing Risk-based approach for classroom and online 
training courses
Reorganization of Group-wide whistleblower system ongoing establish Group-wide minimum standards; 
external internet presence; further rollout across 
brands and companies

Page 36
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
36
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt
ACTION PLAN – STRATEGY AND MANAGEMENT
Action areas Goals and actions Deadline Status
Zero-impact mobility establish mobility solutions business 2025 New
Rapidly develop new mobility solutions 2025 ongoing
leading provider of autonomous vehicles –  
rapid market launches planned
2025 Most recent evolutionary stage of seDRic concept 
presented at iAA in 2017; platform created for 
highly diverse model family
forecast and analyze mobility trends ongoing presented and discussed in internal Group and 
brand strategy meetings and at stakeholder 
Dialog events (DRiVe Group forum)
supplier management extend e-learning tool and sustainability 
questionnaire
ongoing in terms of procurement spending, 80% coverage 
for e-learning tool and 89% for sustainability 
questionnaire; planned increase of coverage to 
83% for e-learning tool and 93% for sustainability 
questionnaire in 2018
perform in-depth sustainability audits ongoing 49 audits carried out in the reporting period; 
45 audits were planned in 2017
provide supplier training in sustainability ongoing More than 700 suppliers trained on the subject of 
sustainability
implementation of oecD Due Diligence Guidance ongoing evaluation of supplier information on conflict 
minerals
sustainable management ensure similar management of sustainability within the 
Group and by the brands
2015 Management structure introduced at Volkswagen 
commercial Vehicles
sharpen positioning of brands 2025 ongoing
establish it-based sustainability management system 
at Group, brand and company level
ongoing Already in use

Page 37
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
37
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  sustAiNAble MANAGeMeNt stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  supplieR  MANAGeMeNt
Supplier  
Management
As a multinational corporation, we also bear a global responsibility. 
The localization strategies at our production sites are generating ever 
more globalized and complex supplier structures. We have more than 
40,000 tier 1 suppliers worldwide, who employ more than 5 million 
people. This is why our sustainability efforts do not stop at our factory 
gates. At 41 locations in 21 countries, our procurement network  
ensures that our production facilities are supplied with production  
materials of the requisite quality, in the required quantities, at 
competitive prices. The goods and services we purchase around the 
world to manufacture our products are worth a total of €173.6 billion 
(including our Chinese joint ventures). 
VOLUME OF GROUP PROCUREMENT BY MARKET
in %
North America 7
South America 2
Asia/Pacic 29
Europe/Other markets 62
SUSTAINABILITY IN SUPPLIER RELATIONS 
Only by cooperating closely with our business partners can we ensure 
compliance with our sustainability standards. With this in mind, we 
rolled out our Sustainability in Supplier Relations concept in 2006. 
To identify the latest developments and long-term challenges in each 
country, we rely on the dialog which takes place between our brands 
and regions through the Sustainability Procurement Network. This 
network supports the continuous exchange of information between 
more than 20 experts.
Our Sustainability in Supplier Relations concept is based on three key 
criteria: requirements, monitoring and development. In this respect, 
we define what we expect of our suppliers in terms of sustainability, 
and then turn these expectations into requirements. We use targeted 
monitoring instruments to ensure compliance, and organize training 
initiatives to steadily raise suppliers’ awareness of sustainability 
issues.
SUSTAINABILITY IN SUPPLIER RELATIONS CONCEPT
Contractually binding
?  Working and sharing information with the global procurement network
?  Involvement in cross-sectoral sustainability initiatives
?  Involvement in working groups on sustainability with other automotive manufacturers
?  Environmental protection
?  Employee rights
?  Transparent business relationships
?  Fair trading practices
?  Duty of care to build responsible 
    supply chains
?  E-learning programs for suppliers 
    and buyers
?  Classroom training courses for suppliers
    and buyers
?  Sustainability questionnaire
?  App for evaluating suppliers’ sustainability
?  Supplier audits
Veri?cation of compliance 
with requirements
Training and raising awareness 
of buyers and suppliers
REQUIREMENTS
FURTHER DEVELOPMENT
MONITORING TRAINING AND SKILLS

Page 38
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
38
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  supplieR  MANAGeMeNt
SUPPLIER REQUIREMENTS
The Sustainability in Supplier Relations concept is based on the 
“Volkswagen Group requirements regarding sustainability in its 
relationships with business partners (Code of Conduct for Business 
Partners)”. The latter embeds our expectations of our business 
partners’ conduct with respect to key environmental, social and 
compliance standards in our contractual agreements. We also call 
on our tier 1 suppliers to pass these requirements down along the 
supply chain. Among other things, these requirements are based on 
the principles of the UN Global Compact, the International Chamber 
of Commerce’s Business Charter for Sustainable Development, and 
the relevant conventions of the International Labour Organization. 
 
 
 
Before we consider working with potential suppliers, we use a country 
risk analysis and other data to obtain a clearer picture of the social, en-
vironmental and human-rights risks in the areas where they operate. 
This analysis is based on third-party information and the results of 
in-house analyses. We also subject all potential new business partners 
and suppliers to an integrity check (Business Partner Check). 
During the fiscal year, prior to being awarded contracts, 137 supplier 
 locations were evaluated against sustainability criteria based on self- 
assessments. 89 of them were subjected to further on-site verification 
by an external specialist.
Our early-warning systems also screen, for example, press and internet 
coverage of relevant sustainability issues. 
Before submitting a quotation, our suppliers must confirm that they 
acknowledge our sustainability requirements; this explicit acknowl-
edgment must be repeated after 12 months have elapsed if they wish 
to submit new quotations. These requirements are an integral part of 
our contracts with all suppliers to General Procurement and with all 
suppliers of production materials. They apply to all goods and services 
purchased worldwide.
full details of Volkswagen Group requirements regarding sustainability in its 
relationships with business partners can be found at: 
http://www.vwgroupsupply.com/one-kbp-pub/en/kbp_public/information/ 
sustainability_1/sustainability.html
CONFLICT MINERALS AND SUSTAINABLE PROCUREMENT 
OF RAW MATERIALS  
To us, sustainable supplier management means providing special 
protection to those groups along our supply chain who are potentially 
at high risk of human rights abuses. In this context, we regard the 
due diligence requirements for building responsible supply chains of 
minerals from conflict-affected and high-risk areas as an additional 
contractual requirement for our suppliers. 
In 2017, to comply with our duty of care and build responsible 
supply chains of minerals from countries affected by conflicts or 
classified as high-risk, we published – among other things – a guide-
line on sustainable raw material procurement. It can be found at: 
www.volkswagenag.com/en/sustainability/policy.html. This step also 
reflects our commitment to fulfilling the stipulations of the OECD 
Due Diligence Guidance for Responsible Supply Chains of Minerals 
from Conflict-Affected and High-Risk Areas. In this respect, we ex-
pect our suppliers to refrain from using any minerals sourced from 
non-compliant smelters. Minerals are considered conflict minerals if 
non-governmental armed groups are supported directly or indirectly 
through their extraction, transportation, trade, handling, processing 
or export. 
Upon request, suppliers and subcontractors must disclose to us the 
smelters or refineries from which they source the metals tin, tantalum, 
tungsten and gold. In 2017, suppliers provided us with specific infor-
mation on their supply chains that enabled us to identify 315 smelters 
of tin, tantalum, tungsten and gold. In cases of suspected non-compli-
ance, we also expect our suppliers to disclose the sources of materials 
that may have some connection with human rights violations such as 
child, forced or compulsory labor, as well as any other forms of mod-
ern slavery or human trafficking. This also applies to labor conditions 
in the extraction of raw materials such as cobalt and mica. 
For this purpose, we advise suppliers to use the standardized report-
ing template available from the Responsible Minerals Initiative (RMI). 
With the help of data provided by RMI, we inform suppliers in business 
relationships with non-compliant smelters and/or refiners about alter-
native options for working with conflict-free smelters and/or refiners. 
We call on our suppliers to practice due diligence along the supply 
chain. This includes implementing measures to ensure that the min-
erals used by suppliers – in particular tantalum, tin, tungsten, gold 
and cobalt – do not directly or indirectly promote or support armed 
conflicts, and are in no way connected to human rights violations.
In 2017, as a member of the DRIVE Sustainability Working Group 
(www.drivesustainability.org), we partnered with other automotive 
manufacturers to launch an initiative on raw materials sourcing. 
This involves systematically identifying sustainability risks in the ex-
traction of raw materials and devising measures to reduce these risks.

Page 39
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
39
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  supplieR  MANAGeMeNt stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  supplieR  MANAGeMeNt
SUPPLIER MONITORING  
In the course of the business process, our business partners are re-
quired to complete our sustainability questionnaire and to document 
their activities relating to specified areas of responsibility. The ques-
tionnaire covers the areas defined in our sustainability requirements. 
We are transferring our sustainability questionnaire over to the 
self-assessment questionnaire developed for use throughout the in-
dustry in a joint project with other automotive corporations involved 
in the DRIVE Sustainability Working Group organized by CSR Europe. 
By the end of the reporting year, over 25,000 of our suppliers had com-
pleted a sustainability self-assessment questionnaire and submitted 
it to us. This covers around 89% of our total procurement volume. We 
use the responses to these self-assessments to help identify ways to 
enhance sustainability performance, and then communicate the latter 
to our suppliers. In the last fiscal year, by taking appropriate measures 
to enhance suppliers’ sustainability performance, we were able to im-
prove the sustainability performance of more than 1,500 suppliers.
STATUS OF SUSTAINABILITY QUESTIONNAIRE
Total in 
2012–2017 
cumulated
Status 2017, 
based on 
procurement 
expenditure
Procurement 
expenditure- 
based target 
for 2017
Procurement 
expenditure- 
based target 
for 2018
sustainability 
Questionnaire 
(self-assessment)  25,046 89% 93% 93%
As one of our environmental requirements, we require our tier 1  
suppliers to put in place a certified environmental management  
system that complies with ISO 14001 and/or EMAS. To date, 88% of  
our tier 1 suppliers have documented such a system. In accordance 
with the EMAS and ISO 14001 environmental certification and audit-
ing procedures at our sites, contractors and suppliers who work on  
site and have an environmental impact are also subject to regular  
audits. In addition, we encourage our suppliers to put in place a  
certified occupational health and safety management system that 
complies with OHSAS 18001, SA8000 and/or AA1000. 
Where selected business partners are identified by self-assessments or 
our internal analysis system as being at increased risk of non-compli-
ance with sustainability requirements, they are – for example – audited 
by an external specialist on site. These audits cover all our sustain-
ability assessment criteria, as well as interviews with employees of the 
selected suppliers; 321 suppliers were audited in the current fiscal year.
If there is reason to suspect that tier 1 suppliers or their subcontractors 
are failing to comply with our sustainability requirements, we ask the 
party concerned for a written statement using a standardized report 
(6D Report). Based on the six points we specify in the report, our busi-
ness partners can describe the situation and any remedial measures. If 
the answers prove unsatisfactory, we take further steps, such as exam-
ining documentation or visiting the supplier’s premises. 
What we refer to as “ad-hoc cases” represent a significant proportion 
of our supplier assessment activity. These refer to the sudden dis-
covery of instances where a supplier is suspected of non-compliance 
with our sustainability requirements. This may happen, for example, 
during an on-site audit.
Where such an ad-hoc or suspected case of non-compliance occurs, 
the ad-hoc expert team from the relevant brand or region coordinates 
the implementation of a series of remedial measures, as appropriate. 
In such cases, the team receives support from the corporate ad-hoc 
expert team in Wolfsburg.
In 2017, for example, we worked with selected suppliers to identify 
challenges involved in complying with sustainability requirements 
related to their management of subcontractors. Due to the complexity 
of the supply chains involved, we will continue to work on these issues 
with our suppliers in 2018.
Apart from sustainability issues, last year, for example, we identified 
non-conformances in the management of occupational health and 
safety during a third-party audit. Together with the supplier and the 
local ad-hoc expert team, we developed a plan of action. As part of 
implementing the action plan, the supplier’s plant was inspected and 
the supplier was given practical help by the ad-hoc team. All remedial 
measures were completed by the end of 2017.

Page 40
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
40
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  supplieR  MANAGeMeNt
PROCUREMENT VOLUME-BASED PROPORTION OF  
ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL CERTIFICATION OF MAIN SUPPLIERS
2017 2016 2015 2014 2013
Environmental certification (EMAS, ISO 14001)
Verified 61% 55% 49% 48% 44%
self-assessed 27% 32% 35% 39% 40%
Total 88% 87% 84% 87% 84%
Social certification(OHSAS 18001, SA8000, AA1000)
Verified (Total) 50% 13% 9% 8% 6%
In addition to 62 ad-hoc cases, our Internal Audit function uncov-
ered an additional 31 cases in the reporting period which resulted in 
measures being agreed with suppliers. These cases involved supplier 
conduct that failed to comply with regulatory or contractual require-
ments, which was either reported by individuals or discovered in the 
course of regular program audits.
In addition, both employees and third parties can address possible 
cases of non-compliance via the Volkswagen Group’s employee rep-
resentation bodies or trade union associations, as well as through the 
Volkswagen Group’s ombudsman system.
As a result of these audits and the above-mentioned ad-hoc cases,  
16 business relationships were terminated in the reporting period.
AD-HOC CASES 2017 
Total Group Procurement
Geographical 
distribution*  Context 
Type of  
supplier
europe 21 social standards 12 Direct supplier 59
Asia 7
environmental 
protection 5 subcontractor 3
North America 0 compliance 35
south America 33
Multiple  
contexts 10
Africa 1
*In terms of geographical distribution, Russia and Turkey are allocated to Asia.

Page 41
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
41
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  supplieR  MANAGeMeNt stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  supplieR  MANAGeMeNt
SUPPLIER TRAINING 
To anchor the Sustainability in Supplier Relations concept more 
firmly throughout the Group, we are making employees more aware 
of sustainability issues along the supply chain and providing them 
with appropriate training. The concept is an established part of the 
skills profile for all Procurement employees. In 2017, more than 
2,000 procurement staff worldwide were given training in this area. 
In addition, buyers of components associated with higher sustain-
ability risks were given an intensive training program in a separate 
format.
To facilitate ongoing supplier development, we make an e-learning 
module on sustainability available to all suppliers as part of our 
business relationship, as well as to Volkswagen Group procurement 
staff, in all languages of the countries which have been defined as 
compliance risks. By the end of the reporting year, 29,000 suppliers 
– representing 80% of our procurement volume – had completed the 
e-learning module. 
STATUS QUO E-LEARNING „SUSTAINABILITY QUESTIONNAIRE“
Total 
2012–2017, 
cumulated
Status 
in 2017, 
based on 
procurement 
expenditure
Procurement 
expenditure- 
based target 
for 2016
Procurement 
expenditure- 
based target 
for 2018
e-learning 29,000 80%  83% 83%
 
Alongside the e-learning format, we also conduct issue-specific sustain-
ability training courses and workshops with our suppliers at selected 
locations. During the reporting period, training events were held in 
Turkey, India, Italy, Germany, Argentina and Brazil. In total, around 700 
personnel employed by some 360 of our suppliers were given training 
on sustainability issues at these events. 
In 2015, as part of our efforts to work with our suppliers to minimize 
the negative environmental impacts of our vehicles, we also joined the 
CDP Supply Chain Program, which documents greenhouse gas emis-
sions along the entire value chain. 
 further information on this topic can be found in the  
products and production section on page 52

Page 42
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
42
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  iNteGRity
Integrity Because we value a neutral outside perspective, in 2016 we also appointed a Sustainability Council of experts in research, academia, 
science and politics. With their independent expertise and recom-
mendations, they support our efforts to fulfill our social responsibili-
ties, promote integrity, foster our stakeholder dialog, and advance the 
steady, sustainable development of our Company. 
Furthermore, the remuneration of the Group Board of Management is 
geared to the Company’s long-term results. We have overhauled our re-
muneration system to balance the interests of our different stakeholder 
groups, ensuring that it:
 § aligns with established market practice and regulatory requirements
 § is geared to capital markets and reflects personnel-related transfor-
mation objectives
 § incorporates the strategic goals of our TOGETHER – Strategy 2025
 § sets ambitious goals for sustainable corporate growth
 § incorporates an extended long-term perspective
 § represents a key element of the Group’s strategic realignment
 § does not reflect any past events, hence focuses entirely on the future
 § is based on a transparent target-compensation approach
 § includes a total remuneration cap that is markedly lower than the 
caps for individual remuneration components
 § is based on clear remuneration policy guidelines
 § is transparent and easy to understand
further information on the work of the sustainability council can be found  
in our sustainability magazine shift 2017 at:  
https://www.volkswagenag.com/en/sustainability/shift.html
The massive loss of trust that followed the diesel issue in particular 
made it clear that our primary aim must be to become a role model 
for integrity. This intention represents one of the key objectives of our 
TOGETHER – Strategy 2025. In our integrity program, we are pursuing 
a three-dimensional approach that unites the dimensions of corporate 
culture, integrity and compliance:
TOGETHER, INTEGRITY, CULTURE AND COMPLIANCE REPRESENT 
VOLKSWAGEN’S NEW SELF-IMAGE
CULTURE
COM
PLIANCE IN
TE
GR
IT
Y
How do we work 
together?
What 
attitudes 
do I adopt?
What 
are our rules 
and policies?
The integrity management function is responsible for planning, 
preparing and implementing programs and projects that aim to raise, 
clarify and intensify our collective awareness of integrity, as well as 
reinforcing a shared culture of integrity within the Company. On  
1 January 2016, we also created the Group Board of Management  
position for Integrity and Legal Affairs. 

Page 43
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
43
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  iNteGRity stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  iNteGRity
INTEGRITY PROGRAM
Our goal is to enhance the culture of integrity in the Group and create 
a collective awareness of integrity. To this end, in 2016 we launched 
an integrity program that includes all employees and is based on six 
action areas:
1.  Dialog & communication: We regularly distributed information on 
the concept of integrity and its importance, and on the develop-
ment of the integrity program. We also set up an integrity mailbox 
to facilitate direct communication between our employees and the 
integrity management function. In addition, we held a live chat on 
our internal social network to encourage discussion.
2.  Sounding Board program: This program aims to improve dialog 
between the integrity management function and the workforce. 
This aim is facilitated by our Integrity Ambassadors – voluntary 
supporters drawn from our management and staff. 
3.  Executive program: The special responsibility of members of man-
agement to serve as role models for integrity was emphasized in a 
letter signed by the entire Group Board of Management. 7,300 man-
agers, from group leaders to Board-level executives, participated in 
integrity training in the form of a mandatory web-based training 
course for all managers, as well as a mandatory four-day confer-
ence. We also provided managers with tools for communicating 
topics such as integrity, culture and compliance to the workforce. 
THE SIX ACTION AREAS OF THE INTEGRITY PROGRAM
Dialog & 
Communication
Sounding
Board
Program
Monitoring 
& Reporting
Internatio-
nalization
Executive 
Program
Processes 
& Tools
SOUNDING BOARD PROGRAM
Volunteer integrity ambassadors from all 
divisions and levels of the hierarchy. 
Looking at things from employees’ perspective. 
Active interface between specialist departments 
and integrity management function.
EXECUTIVE PROGRAM
Taking actions to hone managers’ 
ability to function as role models 
(trainings etc.).
PROCESSES & TOOLS
Embedding integrity in existing 
processes (e.g. personnel processes).
MONITORING & REPORTING
Measuring and communicating 
the e?ectiveness of activities initiated under 
the integrity program.
INTERNATIONALIZATION
Planning and executing the expansion 
of the integrity program to brands,
 companies, regions, and locations.
DIALOG & COMMUNICATION
Ongoing dialog on integrity made 
possible by focused involvement of 
employees.
Strengthening the culture of integrity
4.  Processes & tools: We continuously assess ways of integrating our 
principles of integrity into our key management functions, such 
as personnel processes. For instance, information on integrity is 
already a core element of our onboarding package for all newly 
hired employees, and in 2018, our web-based training course will 
become mandatory for all non-managerial employees. 
5.  Monitoring & reporting: Regular monitoring helps us to fine-
tune and readjust our integrity program and to underscore the 
relevance of integrity as a topic. This includes the evaluation of 
feedback received from our Integrity Ambassadors, employees and 
managers, as well as reports in internal media and external publi-
cations. We are currently developing strategic KPIs, in some cases 
in consultation with external specialists.
6.  Internationalization: Following the pilot phase at our Wolfsburg 
site, we are planning to expand the integrity program to include 
all brands, companies and regions. Employees responsible for gov-
ernance, risk management and compliance will play an important 
role in this process.

Page 44
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
44
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  coMpliANce
In the long term, we can only succeed as a Company if we act with 
integrity, respect statutory provisions worldwide and stand by our 
voluntary undertakings and ethical principles, even when this is the 
harder choice. Compliance must be second nature to all employees 
of our Group.
The principles set down in the Volkswagen Group’s Code of Conduct, 
which were completely reworked in the reporting year, are of essential 
importance to our employees and have been communicated through-
out the Group. The responsibility of each and every employee to 
comply with rules and regulations is given special emphasis in the 
new Code of Conduct. We have included real-world examples under 
each topic and improved the readability of the text with the aim of 
making it relevant and useful to all employees. The Volkswagen Group 
Code of Conduct was signed by every member of the Group Board of 
Management. 
 
the Volkswagen Group’s complete code of conduct can be found at: 
https://www.volkswagenag.com/presence/nachhaltigkeit/documents/ 
policy-intern/code_of_conduct_2017_Vw_Group_english.pdf
 
Since 2016, the Board of Management’s Integrity and Legal Affairs 
function has been responsible for compliance. A new Group Chief 
Compliance Officer has been in place since April 1, 2017. In the report-
ing year, new structures were created within the compliance organi-
zation and its staff expanded. In addition to centers of competence 
at Group level, the structure includes Divisional Compliance Officers 
and a Regional Compliance Office. The Group Chief Compliance Officer 
reports directly to the Board Member for Integrity and Legal Affairs. 
The compliance organization is closely interconnected by various 
arrangements, including regular conferences and teleconferences. 
In addition, we have established the Volkswagen Group Compliance 
Committee under the direction of the Board Member for Integrity 
and Legal Affairs. The committee addresses monitoring, as well as the 
long-term, coordinated and continuing development of responses to 
fundamental compliance-related issues within the Volkswagen Group. 
The Group Compliance Committee is charged with the evaluation, im-
plementation, coordination and documentation of any adjustments 
that may be required to structures and processes across all divisions 
and Group companies.
The Compliance department has positioned itself to meet fu-
ture challenges. With the aim of better fulfilling this mission and 
drawing on lessons learned from past incidents, our whistleblower 
system, which was put in place in 2006, was improved and partially 
restructured in 2017; further optimization of the processes was 
completed on November 1, 2017. Among other initiatives, a central 
Investigation Office was set up in the Compliance department at the 
beginning of the year. It is responsible for coordinating the Volk-
swagen Group’s whistleblower system and for processing tip-offs 
relating to Volkswagen AG or the Group, including all brands and 
companies.
In addition, AUDI AG, Dr. Ing. h.c. F. Porsche AG and Volkswagen 
Truck & Bus GmbH are setting up individual brand investigation 
offices for themselves and their subsidiaries. 
Reports of compliance violations can be submitted in all of the 
Group’s main languages and are handled confidentially. The people 
providing the information need not fear being punished by the 
Company for doing so. Whistleblowers always decide for themselves 
whether or not they wish to remain anonymous.
Thus in 2017, an additional, specially protected online reporting 
channel was set up to allow violations to be reported anonymously 
to the Investigation Office. As part of the ongoing development 
of the whistleblower system, employees of Volkswagen AG and 
other Group companies were made more aware of the system for 
reporting non-compliances and the system itself was restructured – 
among other things, to ensure that there was a uniform procedure 
in place across the Group. In 2017, 1,489 reports were registered 
across the Group via the whistleblower system, of which 841 were 
substantiated. In the case of all substantiated reports, investigations 
were or are being carried out, and any misconduct uncovered was or 
is being appropriately punished.
The whistleblower system focuses on the disclosure of suspected 
serious violations as defined in our guideline. We define serious vio-
lations as cases that could cause substantial harm to the interests of 
the Volkswagen Group or one of its Group companies – in particular, 
financial harm or damage to reputation. This includes, for example, 
breaches of criminal laws, violations of U.S. environmental regula-
tions, and especially human rights violations. Infringements of our 
Code of Conduct or other internal regulations may also constitute 
serious procedural violations as defined in our whistleblower guide-
line.
Compliance

Page 45
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
45
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  coMpliANce stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  coMpliANce
Experienced lawyers and defense attorneys work in the whistleblow-
er system. They follow up the tip-offs, taking both incriminating 
and exonerating factors into account. A full investigation is only 
launched after very careful examination of each report, and only if 
there is concrete evidence of a serious breach of the rules. The per-
sons implicated are presumed innocent until proof of misconduct 
has been established. They are treated fairly, allowed to respond as 
soon as possible, informed of the outcome of the investigation, and 
vindicated if they have been wrongly accused. The process provides 
comprehensive protections both for the whistleblower and for the 
person accused.
Detailed information on the Volkswagen Group’s whistleblower system can be 
found in the Group Management Report in our Annual Report 2017.  
PREVENTION THROUGH INFORMATION
To raise awareness of the importance of compliance, all new employ-
ment contracts between Volkswagen AG and management staff on 
the one hand, and employees covered by collective agreements on the 
other, include references to the Code of Conduct plus the obligation to 
comply with it. As part of the hiring process, all new employees receive 
a copy of the Code of Conduct, and participation in training courses on 
the Code of Conduct is mandatory for all employees under permanent 
contract to Volkswagen AG.
We are aware that the risk of individual misconduct can never be com-
pletely eliminated. To raise employee awareness of compliance-relat-
ed issues, we use both traditional communication channels such as 
employee newsletters, magazines and information stands (at works 
meetings, for example), and also electronic media such as intranet 
portals and Group Connect. 
In 2017, around 219,549 employees throughout the Group were given 
various forms of compliance training. Mandatory compliance training 
courses are held for specific target groups, following a risk-based 
approach. In addition to traditional lectures and online e-learning 
programs, case studies, role-play and other interactive formats are also 
used in employee and management training courses.
Employees are able to obtain advice on compliance issues by writing 
to dedicated e-mail addresses. Advice provided to employees of the 
Volkswagen brand focused in particular on the Code of Conduct and 
corruption prevention. Employees of Volkswagen AG are able to obtain 
personal advice about compliance issues by contacting the compliance 
organization via a dedicated e-mail address. 
The Volkswagen Integrity, Culture and Compliance Convention also 
took place in the reporting year. A total of more than 7,300 executives, 
managers and Works Council members from Volkswagen AG, Volkswa-
gen Sachsen and Volkswagen Osnabrück attended the event. 
The aim of the convention was to continue driving forward the change 
process at Volkswagen. Executives from different levels of the man-
agement hierarchy explored topics such as integrity, cultural change 
and compliance in their everyday work, as well as their responsibility 
to lead by example. Participants prepared for the event by using an 
e-learning program to familiarize themselves with the issues.

Page 46
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
46
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  Risk MANAGeMeNt
Risk Management
Promptly identifying the risks and opportunities associated with our 
operating activities and taking a forward-thinking approach to manag-
ing them is crucial to our Company’s long-term success. A foresighted 
risk management process and effective internal control systems are 
therefore vitally important to us. Not only do we set high internal stan-
dards, we also insist that all our suppliers along our entire value chain 
comply with these standards.
Our risk management and internal control system (RMS/ICS) defines 
the primary principles and elements of our Group, forming the basis 
for the appropriate and effective management and control of material 
risks. This includes not only risks with impacts limited purely to the 
Volkswagen Group, but also risks that could have impacts on the envi-
ronment and society.
RISK MANAGEMENT AND INTERNAL  
CONTROL SYSTEM (RMS/ICS)
Our comprehensive RMS/ICS helps us deal with risks in a responsible 
manner. The organizational design of the Volkswagen Group’s RMS/
ICS is based on the internationally recognized COSO Enterprise Risk 
Management framework (COSO: Committee of Sponsoring Orga-
nizations of the Treadway Commission). In the reporting year, we 
continued to pursue a risk management approach that combines 
aspects of the internal control system with aspects of the compliance 
management system. 
Our organizational guideline on risk management requires all 
divisions and business units to put a RMS/ICS in place. The exact 
operational form of the RMS/ICS is up to the risk managers in the 
individual divisions and business units. The Group Risk Management 
function supports the divisions by providing necessary training and 
participating in conceptual development.
The Board of Management receives ad-hoc, quarterly and annual risk 
reports. 
In 2017, we continued to reinforce our internal control system in 
the area of product compliance. This includes what are known as the 
Golden Rules. 
Any assessment of the probability and scope of future events or 
developments is, by its nature, subject to uncertainty. We are therefore 
aware that even the best RMS cannot foresee all potential risks and 
even the best ICS can never completely prevent irregular or non-com-
pliant actions.
Another key element of our RMS/ICS is the three lines of defense 
model – a basic element required, among others, by the European 
Confederation of Institutes of Internal Auditing (ECIIA). In line with 
this model, our RMS/ICS has three lines of defense that are designed 
to protect us from the occurrence of material risks. 
A detailed overview of our risk management and internal control system can  
be found in the Report on Risks and opportunities in our Annual Report 2017 on 
page 165–168.

Page 47
Group Management Report > Report on Risks and opportunities  
> Risks from the Diesel issue
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
47
stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  Risk MANAGeMeNt stRAteGy AND MANAGeMeNt  |  Risk MANAGeMeNt
 § The first line of defense is formed by the operational risk manage-
ment and internal control systems of the individual Group divi-
sions and companies. The RMS/ICS is an integral part of our Group’s 
organizational structures and processes. 
 § The second line of defense is the Group Risk Management function, 
which sets standards for the RMS/ICS and coordinates the quarterly 
risk survey and annual governance, risk and compliance (GRC) con-
trol process. It reports to the Group Board of Management on any 
material risks, which are also defined in terms of quantitative and 
qualitative assessment criteria and given probability ratings.
 § The third line of defense is Group Internal Audit, which carries out 
regular checks on the structure and implementation of the RMS as 
part of its independent audit activities.
 
A detailed overview of our risk management and internal control sys-
tem can be found in our 2017 Annual Report, in the Group Manage-
ment Report’s Report on Risks and Opportunities. 
The diesel issue both causes intrinsic risks for the Volkswagen Group 
and has an impact on existing risks. 
Risks that could impact on our bottom line also include general envi-
ronmental risks and climate-change risks.
These include risks that could result from differing CO? and emissions 
regulations. Extreme weather situations, storms or floods can cause 
failures of information and communication technology, supplier fail-
ures resulting in production stoppages, or general production down-
time at one or more of our production facilities around the world. Our 
evaluation of the overall risk situation includes the potential impacts 
of natural disasters and resource shortages. Our risk assessment takes 
the form of a net analysis, i.e. taking account of any countermeasures 
initiated to minimize the risk.
Our Group risk management processes also take account of the risks 
associated with six nonfinancial aspects:
 § Environmental matters
 § Labor matters
 § Social matters
 § Customer matters
 § Respect for human rights
 § Combating corruption and graft
 
The Report on Risks and Opportunities in the Management Report 
provides an overview of the risks judged by the Volkswagen Group  
to be of material significance, including risks related to the six non-
financial aspects subject to mandatory reporting. It also includes risks 
arising from the diesel issue under the nonfinancial aspects of envi-
ronmental matters (see link below). Otherwise no other high-proba-
bility risks with potentially severe negative impacts on nonfinancial 
aspects were identified in fiscal year 2017.
“THREE LINES OF DEFENSE” APPROACH
SECOND LINE OF DEFENCE
(GROUP RISK MANAGEMENT)
ReportReportUrgency Report
FIRST LINE OF DEFENCE
(DIVISIONS)
THIRD LINE OF DEFENCE
(GROUP INTERNAL AUDIT)
Responsibility for RMS/ICS 
in organizational units
Parts of RMS/ICS covered in 
Group Internal Audit function’s 
audit reports or reports on 
specic RMS/ICS audits
Responsibility for RMS/ICS standards 
and risk management processes
BOARD OF MANAGEMENT
RISKS
SUPERVISORY BOARD
Scoping
Data collection 
and assessment at 
unit level
Proof of e?ectiveness 
at unit level
Reporting
Follow-up activities to 
remedy weaknesses
3.
RMS/ICS 
components
1.
Target categories
2.
Organizational 
involvement

Page 48


Page 49
Climate change, resource availability and urbanization are among the major  global 
challenges facing us in the Volkswagen Group. Our TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 
aims to make a significant contribution to ensuring that mobility has less impact 
on the environment. We also want to help attain the United Nations Sustainable 
 Development Goals (SDGs). Our aim is to become a role model for environmental 
protection. We believe the transformation of our core business is the right  
way to meet these objectives.  
Products and 
Production

Page 50
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
50
Products and Production  |  ManageMent aPProach –  Products and Production
Our Group has a long tradition of commitment to environmental 
protection. It is firmly embedded in our TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 
as one of our four corporate objectives. As one of the world’s leading 
providers of sustainable mobility, we also want to become an Environ­
mental Role Model. We are working toward this long­term goal by 
taking responsibility for the environment – day in, day out. 
With this in mind, we have defined the following targets:
 § To continuously improve our carbon footprint
 § To continuously reduce our pollutant emissions
 § To continuously reduce our resource consumption
 
For us, effective environmental protection means complexity and 
consistency in equal measure. This is why we are focusing on the 
 development of environmentally friendly products by ensuring that 
our powertrain and fuel strategy is fundamentally sustainable. Road­
map E, which we adopted in 2017 as the centerpiece of our electrifi­
cation drive, will be supported by innovative solutions for modern 
combustion engines and alternative drive systems. Research into 
sustainable mobility solutions and digitized business models is the 
final element in our strategic realignment. 
We look at the entire life cycle from product development through 
production, from logistics – including the supply chain – through 
the use phase, right through to recycling (LifeCycle Thinking). At 
every stage, we take a holistic approach to analyzing environmentally 
relevant factors such as energy and CO? emissions, material manage­
ment and recycling concepts, water management, recycling solutions, 
pollutants and nature conservation, in order to meet our ambitious 
decarbonization, pollutant reduction and resource conservation 
targets. We ensure that our progress toward meeting these targets is 
visible by participating in ratings and rankings.
We have set ourselves the goal of becoming one of the world’s leading 
providers of sustainable mobility. Consequently, alongside traditional 
environmental management, we are making the quality assurance 
and safety of our products our top priority. This is the only way we 
can guarantee that our products meet the very highest standards of 
vehicle and transport safety.
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND  
MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS
The Group Board of Management is the highest internal decision­ 
making authority on environmental matters; it also functions as 
the Group’s Sustainability Board. The Group­wide management of 
 environmental protection is the responsibility of the Corporate 
 Environment and Energy Steering Committee, with the support of 
numerous specialist bodies.
The Corporate Environment and Energy Steering Committee coordi­
nates our brands and companies, and provides regular progress 
reports to the Board of Management.
All environmental protection activities in our Group are centered on 
our global principles. We continue to steadily expand and improve 
on these principles. The following principles are binding for all Group 
brands:
 § Group Environmental Policy 
 § Group Environmental Principles Locations/Production 
 § Group Environmental Principles Product 
 § Mission Statement on Biodiversity 
 
All responsible parties within the Group, working for our brands and 
at our locations, are required to comply with these environmental 
principles. The environmental policies and targets of our various 
brands are also derived from these principles. 
Environmental Officers from every part of the Group regularly meet 
at the Group Environmental Conference (G.E.C.), seeking to optimize 
our eco­friendly alignment along the entire value chain. 
Environmental protection is teamwork. This is why we involve em­
ployees across the whole Group in our efforts to jointly achieve the 
Group’s environmental goals. One of the building blocks we use for 
this purpose is the “Works Agreement on Environmental Protection”, 
which has been in place at Volkswagen AG factories (including the 
Technical Development department in Wolfsburg) since 1995 and was 
most recently updated in 2013. In support of the production process, 
the Volkswagen brand has appointed 318 ambassadors, including 
196 Environmental Ambassadors (SfU) and 122 Energy Experts (SfE). 
As at the end of 2017, 100 of our 120 production sites, as well as the 
Volkswagen Passenger Cars brand’s Technical Development depart­
ment, held a valid ISO 14001 or EMAS certificate. This equates to 99% 
of our workforce.
Management Approach –  
Products and Production

Page 51
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
51
Products and Production  |  ManageMent aPProach –  Products and Production Products and Production  |  ManageMent aPProach –  Products and Production
RESOURCE CONSERVATION THROUGHOUT LIFE CYCLE
Our vision of forward­thinking, environmentally minded mobility 
spans every stage in the value chain. A comprehensive environmental 
assessment must consider all the environmental impacts of a  vehicle 
over its full life cycle, from the manufacturing process – including 
resource extraction, production of materials, supplier  processes and 
our own in­house production at all locations – through the use phase 
– including driving emissions, fuel preparation and supply – through 
to the ultimate recycling of the vehicle at the end of its life cycle.
The Group Environmental Conference held in September 2017 posi­
tioned “LifeCycle Thinking” as one of the key elements in our future 
business activities. 
Improving each vehicle’s environmental performance over its full life 
cycle is one of the environmental objectives of the Technical Develop­
ment function of our Volkswagen Passenger Cars and Volkswagen 
Commercial Vehicles brands. To meet this goal, we prepare detailed 
life cycle assessments (LCAs) for new vehicles, powertrains, compo­
nents and materials. One of the outcomes of these activities was the 
creation of our in­house software package LEAD (Life Cycle Environ­
mental Assessment Database). The system supports the Group­wide 
sharing of harmonized data that guarantees the use of standardized 
routines for calculating environmental footprints. 
Further information on sustainability standards as value creators  
for our brands can be found at: 
– Audi | aluminium stewardship initiative 
In addition, 44 production sites have had their energy management 
systems certified under the ISO 50001 standard. Since 2009, the 
“ Integration of Environmental Factors into the Volkswagen Brand’s 
Product Development” model used in the Volkswagen Passenger Cars 
brand’s Technical Development department has also been certified 
to ISO/TR 14062.
In order to devise and implement savings initiatives at Group loca­
tions, the Environment Task Force analyzes production processes 
and workshop infrastructure. This optimization team from Corporate 
 Environmental Research investigates and evaluates resource and 
 energy flows in production, together with the resulting environ­
mental impacts. Based on experience gathered from more than 
30 analyses, the team is now able to systematically strengthen and 
drive forward the sharing of initiatives. With the Environment Task 
Force’s support, we were able to transfer these initiatives to South 
America, North America and China. Existing ideas – as well as many 
newly  developed ones – were evaluated in terms of their local and 
climate­specific impacts and implemented wherever possible.
We use the “Massnahmen@web” IT system to record and catalog 
 environmental measures and make them available for Group­wide­
sharing of best practices. In the reporting period, some 1,600 imple­
mented initiatives relating to energy and the environment were 
documented in this system, all serving to improve our passenger car 
and light commercial vehicle infrastructure and production processes. 
As well as being worthwhile from an environmental viewpoint, these 
activities also make financial sense, resulting in annual savings of 
more than €37 million.
Further information on iso 50001 certification can be found in the  
sustainability sections of our brands: 
– Volkswagen 
– Audi 
– Seat 
– ŠKODA  
– Bentley 
– Lamborghini 
– Porsche 
– Volkswagen Nutzfahrzeuge 
–  MAN
 
SITES WITH ENVIRONMENTAL CERTIFICATION
previous year in brackets
ISO 14001
100 (95)
ISO 50001
44 (42)

Page 52
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
52
Products and Production  |  ManageMent aPProach –  Products and Production
We lay the foundations for maximizing the fuel economy and 
resource efficiency of our vehicles during the product development 
process.
In 2017, we further extended our innovation and technology leader­
ship by investing in new models, eco­friendly drive technologies and 
enhanced production processes. At the same time, we sought to make 
our cross­brand innovation management even more efficient, and to 
improve the interaction between our brands’ development processes. 
During the 2017 fiscal year, we concentrated our research and 
develop ment activities across the Group on expanding our  product 
port folio and improving the functionality, quality, safety and environ­
mental compatibility of our products – while simultaneously reducing 
the number of platforms we use. Our Group invested €13.1 billion 
in research and development in 2017. Much of this was spent on 
 efficiency­enhancing technologies.
With respect to resource efficiency, we also evaluate life cycle improve­
ment measures in economic terms. Our Corporate Research unit is 
currently involved in two long­term research projects, examining 
what the resource­efficient factory and resource­efficient vehicle of 
the future will look like. New technologies such as electric and fuel­cell 
vehicles play a key role here – especially in terms of their resource 
requirements – as do new closed­loop recycling concepts.
To ensure a holistic approach to optimization, we also involve our 
suppliers along the entire value chain so that together, we can mini­
mize the environmental impacts of our vehicles. We became active 
members of the CDP Supply Chain Program (SCP) back in 2015. In 
2017, we once again used the SCP to survey more than 100 suppliers 
who together represent 43% of our production­related procurement 
spending (excluding services, VW Brazil, Scania and our joint ventures 
in China). Overall, the response rate in 2017 rose to 84% (2016: 83%). 
 According to our suppliers’ self­assessments, they reduced their 
overall emissions by a total of 16.5 million t of CO?­e compared to 
the previous year (2016: 16 million t of CO?­e). In reporting year 
2016, the CDP included Science Based Targets (SBT) in the question­
naire for the first time: 25% of the suppliers who responded have 
already set themselves SBTs or undertaken to do so. These emission 
reduction  developments within our supply chain are contributing 
to  Volkswagen’s positive evaluation under the CDP rating’s Leader­
ship index.
ACTION PLAN – PRODUCTS AND PRODUCTION  
In our 2025 environmental program, two indicators record the 
 progress we are making toward attaining two strategic objectives:
 § In this context, we define the decarbonization index (DCI) as a strate­
gic indicator which we use to measure progress. It measures products’ 
CO? emissions along the entire value chain. It is calculated by dividing 
our CO? footprint by the number of vehicles produced. It thus incor­
porates both direct and indirect CO? emissions from the individual 
production sites (Scope 1 and 2), as well as all other CO? emissions 
occurring throughout the life cycle of the vehicles sold – from the 
extraction of raw materials through the use phase to the recycling 
of end­of­life vehicles (Scope 3). The DCI thus makes it possible to 
pursue milestones in a transparent, holistic way as we make our way 
toward climate­friendly mobility. We are currently defining DCI target 
values for 2025, in consultation with the Volkswagen Group brands. 
The outcome should ensure that our target values contribute to  
the two­degree target set in the Paris Agreement concluded at the  
UN Climate Conference in December 2015.
 § Environmental impact reduction production per unit (UEP) was 
defined as part of our environmental production strategy, and target 
values were specified for the Group and brands. By 2025, we intend to 
reduce production­related environmental impacts per vehicle by 45% 
compared with 2010. UEP includes the consumption of energy and 
water, emissions of CO? and VOCs, as well as the volume of waste. 
 
By the end of 2017, we achieved a 30.8% reduction in environmental 
impacts. The status at the end of 2017 compared with the 2010 base­
line breaks down as follows (2016 figures in brackets):
 § specific energy consumption: –17.9% (–17.1%)
 § specific CO? emissions: –26.1% (–19.5%)
 § specific VOC emissions: –49.4% (–40.2%)
 § specific water consumption: –17.1% (–14.3%)
 § specific waste for disposal: –43.3% (–34.7%)

Page 53
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
53
Products and Production  |  ManageMent aPProach –  Products and Production Products and Production  |  ManageMent aPProach –  Products and Production
ACTION PLAN – PRODUCTS AND PRODUCTION
Action areas Goals and actions Deadline Status
climate protection and 
decarbonization
decarbonization index (dci) 2018 currently we are defining dci target values for 
2025 in consultation with the Volkswagen group 
brands
continuous reduction of our carbon footprint –  
cdP report scope 3 inventory
2025 cdP scope 3 inventory overall: increase in total  
co? emissions per vehicle (scope 1, 2, 3) from  
33.0 t/a in 2016 to 33.3 t/a in 2017;
cdP scope 3 inventory, category 11:
status of co? fleet emissions in 2017:
eu: 122.1g co?/km (cars and light commercial 
vehicles);
china: 149.6g co?/km (Vgic+sVW+FaW-VW);
Brazil: 129g co?/km;
usa: 163.1g co?/km (audi/VW calendar year;  
excl. VWoa). co? reduction status in production in 
2017: –26.1% (2010 baseline) for passenger cars 
and light commercial vehicles
reduction of european new-car fleet co? emissions to 
95g co?/km
2020 eu fleet co? emissions in 2017:
122.1g co?/km (passenger cars and light 
 commercial vehicles)
regular external audits of emissions tests by 
 independent experts; introduction of random, realistic 
testing of on-the-road emission behavior
2025 Launched in 2017
Fitting particulate filters to tsi and tFsi engines 2017 step-by-step installation of gasoline particulate 
filters (gPF) in all the group fleet’s direct-injection 
tsi and tFsi engines; by 2022, up to 7 million 
 vehicles should be equipped with this technology 
every year
top places in selected product rankings, ratings and 
awards
2017 environmental awards in 2017: 
Vcs auto environmental ranking
Fleet news awards
WaVe trophy 2017
environmentally compatible products roadmap e:
80 new electric models, including 50 all-electric 
 e-vehicles and 30 plug-in hybrids 
By 2025 electric vehicles (BeV):  
 § e-golf
 § e-up!
Plug-in hybrid vehicles (PheV):
 § golf gte
 § Passat gte
 § Passat Variant gte
 § a3 sportback e-tron
 § Q7 e-tron quattro
 § Panamera 4 e-hybrid
roadmap e: 
end-to-end electrification of the entire model portfolio 
(at least one electrically powered version of each of the 
group’s approx. 300 models);
> €20 billion for the industrialization of e-mobility
By 2030 see roadmap e: status by 2025

Page 54
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
54
Products and Production  |  ManageMent aPProach –  Products and Production
ACTION PLAN – PRODUCTS AND PRODUCTION
Action areas Goals and actions Deadline Status
resource conservation 
throughout life cycle
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions from energy 
supply to production facilities in germany by 40% per 
unit produced by 2020 (compared with 2010 baseline)
2020 around €26 million invested in renewable energy 
generated by wind farms and photovoltaic power 
plants; investment of around €15 million in a 
cogeneration (chP) plant; 
investment of around €65 million in a gas and 
steam turbine (combined cycle) plant; 
co? emissions per vehicle from production opera-
tions in germany have already been reduced by 
around 34% since 2010
environmental impact reduction production per unit 
(ueP): across the group as a whole, energy and water 
consumption plus waste and emission levels have been 
reduced by 45% per unit produced (baseline: 2010)
2025 ueP totaled 30.8% in 2017
nature conservation and 
biodiversity
Worldwide commitment to the protection of bio-
diversity at group locations; appropriate targets are 
currently being drawn up
ongoing More than 80 nature conservation projects  
by 8 brands 
Product and road safety systematic quality assurance along the entire  
value chain
ongoing
implementation of Vision Zero: zero fatalities or  
severe injuries in or due to vehicles manufactured  
by the group
ongoing

Page 55
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
55
Products and Production  |  ManageMent aPProach –  Products and Production Products and Production  |  PoWertrain and  FueL strategy
The automotive industry is about to make the next quantum leap 
in innovation. We assume that by 2025, about one in every four new 
vehicles manufactured by the Group – so up to three million units 
per year, depending on market developments – could run entirely on 
battery power. Volkswagen’s Roadmap E, first presented in public at 
the Frankfurt Motor Show (IAA 2017), underscores the Volkswagen 
Group’s ambition to massively accelerate the electrification of its 
entire vehicle portfolio.
The Volkswagen Group’s powertrain and fuel strategy paves the way 
for carbon­neutral, sustainable mobility – entirely in keeping with 
the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). We aim 
to boost powertrain and fuel efficiency with each new generation of 
 vehicles – whether they are driven by combustion engines, hybrid 
drives, plug­in hybrids, all­electric powertrains or, perhaps at some 
point in the future, fuel­cell systems. All our mobility concepts are 
 tailored to the requirements and customer needs of our respective 
markets. By taking this approach, we will broaden our portfolio 
of drive systems such that traditional powertrains will coexist with 
 electric mobility (e­mobility) systems in the future. Our current 
 modular matrix platforms are designed so that different drive systems 
can be deployed in various combinations and flexibly fitted on 
production lines in manufacturing facilities around the world. In the 
future, we will focus on expanding our range of electric powertrains. 
We will also be adding an electrically powered version of our modu­
lar matrix (the Modular Electrification Toolkit or MEB) to form the 
backbone of upcoming electric vehicles. The MEB offers a number 
of significant advantages, especially in terms of packaging, meaning 
the arrangement of powertrain components, auxiliary systems and 
interior features.
Powertrain and  
Fuel Strategy
audi Q7 3.0 tdi e-tron quattro – fuel consumption in l/100 km: 1.9–1.8 
(combined); energy consumption in kWh/100 km: 19.0–18.1 (combined); 
co? emissions in g/km: 50–48 (combined); co? efficiency class: a+.
VW Passat gte – fuel consumption in l/100 km: 1.7–1.6 (combined); 
energy consumption in kWh/100 km: 12.8–12.2 (combined);  
co?  emissions in g/km: 39–37 (combined); co? efficiency class: a+.

Page 56
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
56
Products and Production  |  PoWertrain and  FueL strategy
ROADMAP E
With Roadmap E as a core element of our TOGETHER – Strategy 2025, 
we are launching the largest electrification drive in the automotive 
industry. By 2025, we want to become a world leader in e­mobility. 
To do so, we will make more than 80 new, electric models available 
for purchase to our customers around the world, including some 
50 all­electric vehicles and 30 plug­in hybrids. We are assuming that 
by 2025, one in every four new vehicles manufactured by our Group 
around the world will run on all­electric powertrains. Depending on 
how the market develops, this could be as many as 3 million electric 
vehicles per year. In subsequent years, this figure would then increase 
in leaps and bounds. 
By 2030, we intend to electrify our entire model range. By this deadline 
at the latest, there will be at least one electrically powered version of 
each of the 300 or so models manufactured by the Group, across all 
brands and markets. This makes us the first major mobility company 
to commit to a specific deadline for the full electrification of its fleet. 
Roadmap E anticipates that we shall make more than €20 billion 
available for direct investments in the industrialization of e­mobility 
by 2030 – including investment in vehicles based on newly developed 
electric platforms with ranges of up to 600 km (375 miles). 
Just to equip our own e­vehicle fleet, we will need a battery capacity 
in excess of 150 GWh per year by 2025. This corresponds to the annual 
battery cell manufacturing capacity of at least four “Gigafactories”. 
To make this possible, we have put one of the largest procurement 
volumes in the history of the industry out to tender: more than 
€50 billion.
Further information on e-mobility can be found in the  
sustainability sections of our brands:  
– Audi | e-tron   
– Porsche | ionity  
– Volkswagen | i.d. Family 
– Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles | e-crafter  
– MAN | etrucks 
 
At the moment, we are using lithium­ion cells for our all­electric and 
plug­in hybrid vehicles; we assemble these cells into battery systems. 
We are currently researching various types of batteries based on 
solid electrolytes, which have a higher energy density and also meet 
stricter safety standards. We are investigating ways of industrializing 
these technologies.
With the announcement of our accelerated electrification drive, we 
are simultaneously advocating an orderly systemic transition, with 
the modern combustion engine acting as an indispensable bridge to 
an emission­free future.
Conventional electricity
Conventional fuels
Carbon-neutral fuels
(liquid, gaseous)
Carbon-neutral electricity
Fuel cell
Battery power
Plug-in hybrid
Hybrid drive
Combustion engine
CARBON-
NEUTRAL
sustainable
mobility
POWERTRAIN AN FUEL STRATEGIE

Page 57
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
57
Products and Production  |  PoWertrain and  FueL strategy Products and Production  |  PoWertrain and  FueL strategy
We want to make sustainable, affordable mobility possible for the 
majority. To do so, we will continue to offer and improve our entire 
range of powertrains – from conventional to 100% electric. Even as 
we prepare for carbon­neutral, sustainable mobility, we will still need 
the combustion engine. Selected models like the Volkswagen up! 
with gasoline particulate filters already meet the stringent Euro 6 AG 
exhaust emissions standard, which will not become binding for all 
newly registered vehicles until September 2018. This year, we have 
already started the series production of an exceptionally fuel­efficient 
powertrain for our latest BlueMotion models, in the form of the 96 kW 
1.5 TSI evo. Thanks to our new “sailing” mode – whereby the engine 
is switched off while the vehicle is coasting – and other technical 
inno vations, the 1.5 TSI evo can achieve outstanding fuel efficiency 
of as little as 1.0 l/100 km in real­world conditions, depending on the 
customer’s driving style. 
Today, every new diesel built by our Group is fitted with an SCR 
 catalytic converter as standard, and we equip new gasoline engines 
with soot particulate filters across the board. 
We feel it is more important than ever for us to rigorously pursue 
our modular approach. So that we can offer a broad product portfolio 
as economically as possible, we are reducing the variety of individual 
modules. In the case of our conventional combustion engines, for 
 example, we will cut the number of variants within the Group by 
more than one third over the long term. 
As vehicles become increasingly electrified, CO? emissions in the prod­
uct life cycle are steadily shifting back toward the production phase; 
that is to say, the production of electric vehicles results in significantly 
higher CO? emissions than does the production of conventional vehi­
cles, due in particular to battery production.
During the use phase, however, the tables are turned in favor of 
electric vehicles. If we consider both the CO? emissions resulting from 
the production of fuel or generation of electricity during a vehicle’s 
service life (approx. 200,000 km or 125,000 miles), as well as the CO? 
emissions produced by the actual combustion of fuel (in conventional 
vehicles), electric vehicles show a decided advantage. This advantage 
is so great that despite higher CO? emissions during the production 
phase, electric vehicles have a better carbon footprint over their entire 
life cycle than conventionally powered vehicles. This applies almost 
regardless of the electricity mix used by the electric vehicles (with the 
exception of heavily coal­dependent electricity mixes as found in e.g. 
China or Poland).
ROADMAP BATTERY CELL CHEMISTRY AND ENERGY DENSITY
2014 2017 2018 2020 2025
Lithium ion technology New battery technologies
range*
* basis: eGolf with comparable battery volume
Up to 190 km
230 Wh/l
Up to 300 km
410 Wh/l
Up to 380 km
650 Wh/l
Up to 420 km
700 Wh/l
Up to 500 km
800 Wh/l
Up to 700 km
1,000 Wh/l

Page 58
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
58
Products and Production  |  PoWertrain and  FueL strategy
ALTERNATIVE FUELS  
Decarbonization begins with the type of fuel used. We are already in a 
position to use so­called “reduced­carbon” fuels across all our brands. 
The practical suitability of these fuels for use in combustion engines 
has already been comprehensively demonstrated, and in  certain fields 
their use is already regarded as state of the art. They make it  possible 
to achieve almost carbon­neutral long­distance  mobility while 
simultaneously reducing other exhaust emissions (such as NOX and 
particulate emissions). Reduced­carbon fuels include biofuels (spe­
cifically, second­generation biofuels) and synthetic fuels (sometimes 
known as e­fuels) manufactured using hydrogen electrolysis powered 
by electricity from renewable sources.
By using compressed natural gas (CNG) for transportation purposes, 
that is, using methane as a fuel, we offer our customers an immediately 
available and affordable drive technology that supports sustainable 
mobility based on the combustion engine. With a broad pallet of 
CNG­powered models in the passenger car and commercial vehicle 
sectors, we are a market­influencing technology leader in this field. 
Just by using the fossil natural gas (methane) already available in the 
global gas network, we could cut CO? emissions by up to 25% com­
pared with today’s gasoline engines – while at the same time signifi­
cantly reducing exhaust­gas emissions. And over the next few years, 
the use of biogas or e­gas (synthetic gas produced using electricity 
from renewable sources) could make CNG mobility almost entirely 
carbon­neutral.
A number of projects within the Volkswagen Group and among our 
brands, such as the Audi “Power­to­Gas” project (a power­to­gas plant 
in Werlte) and the SEAT “SMART Green Gas” (waste­to­gas) project are 
producing reduced­carbon fuels (biofuels, e­fuels) and renewable gas 
(biogas, e­gas).
Our Group is also exploring significant synergies with e­mobility 
through “sector coupling”, meaning the joint use of energy sources in 
the power generation, heat and mobility sectors. 
Further information on our brands’ reduced-carbon fuels  
can be found at: 
– Audi | e-fuels strategy  
– SEAT | smart green gas 
– Scania | hybrid technology 
 
For heavy commercial vehicles like trucks and buses in particular, 
liquefied natural gas (LNG) is an economical and clean alternative, 
because its high energy density is ideal for long­distance applications.
However, in order for natural gas to become a widely usable energy 
source, better infrastructural conditions are needed. For example, 
natural­gas filling station networks are only sufficiently developed in 
a few countries. 
Further information on our brands’ alternative powertrain concepts  
can be found at: 
– Audi | e-gas system offer  
– Scania | alternative fuels  
– MAN | innovative transport and energy solutions  
– Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles | cng powertrain 
Under Audi’s leadership, we are also investigating hydrogen (H?) as an 
energy source. We have been working on fuel­cell technology – used 
to transform H? into electrical energy in the vehicle – for more than 
15 years. While operating our test fleets, we have gathered extensive 
practical experience of suitable powertrains. One of the key factors 
required for H? to succeed is a suitable refueling infrastructure. Based 
on what we know at present, H? will not be widely available as a fuel 
in the medium term. For this to be possible, hydrogen filling stations 
and plants for producing hydrogen as a renewable energy source must 
first be developed. For this reason, we are actively involved in the H? 
Mobility project, the aim of which is the systematic development of an 
H? infrastructure in Germany. We will make the decision on whether 
to use H? in production vehicles on the basis of market demand and 
infrastructure. 
ECO-FRIENDLY POWERTRAIN TECHNOLOGIES IN THE GROUP 1
Vehicles produced
2017 2016
Change 
(2016 to 2017)
gas drives (natural gas and LPg) 84,938 (0.82%) 72,955 (0.73%) o +14%
globally hybrid drives 39,525 (0.38%) 39,037 (0.39%) o +1%
all-electric drives 20,913 (0.20%) 15,729 (0.16%) o +25%
Eco-friendly drives (total) 145,376 (1.40%) 127,721 (1.27%) j +12%
2017 2016
Change 
(2016 to 2017)
gas drives (natural gas and LPg) 34,537 (1.01%) 30,807 (0.90%) o +11%
Western europe2 hybrid drives 34,939 (1.02%) 33,222 (0.97%) o +5%
all-electric drives 16,305 (0.47%) 9,480 (0.28%) o +42%
Eco-friendly drives (total) 85,781 (2.50%) 73,509 (2.16%) j +14%
¹ Volkswagen Group production: VW PC, Audi, ŠKODA, SEAT, VW light commercial vehicles, Audi light commercial vehicles excl. luxury brands. 
²  Western Europe: BEL, DNK, DEU, FIN, FRA, GRC, GBR, IRL, ISL, ITA, LUX, NLD, NOR, AUT, PRT, SWE, CHE, ESP, rest of W. Europe.

Page 59
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
59
Products and Production  |  PoWertrain and  FueL strategy Products and Production  |  energy, co?  and cLiMate change  
We welcome the ratification of the Paris Agreement on climate 
change, which aims to limit global warming to less than 2°C above 
pre­industrial levels. Referring to international climate agreements, 
our CEO Matthias Müller is calling upon the automotive industry to 
ensure that all fleet CO? emissions “are steadily reduced to zero by 
2050.”  
ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND CO? EMISSIONS
To reduce energy consumption and CO? emissions across the Group, 
we are relying on a combination of measures, including improved en­
ergy efficiency, the use of gas instead of coal for power generation, and 
the procurement of electricity from renewable sources. We now meet 
around 37% of our global electricity requirements from renewables.
Our most effective lever for reducing our global carbon footprint is 
to optimize CO? emissions from our vehicle fleet. After all, according 
to the Scope 3 GHG Inventory, 74% of all CO? emissions are produced 
during the use phase.
And this does not take into account direct CO? emissions from our 
company cars. We are currently working on standardizing the meth­
ods used to record emissions from our company­car fleet worldwide. 
The Volkswagen Group’s new passenger car fleet in the EU (excluding 
Lamborghini and Bentley) emitted an average of 122 g CO?/km* over 
the reporting period – well below the European limit of 130 g CO?/
km applied in 2017. The slight increase compared with the previous 
year is mainly due to the new measurement procedures that must be 
used, and the decline in the proportion of diesel­vehicle deliveries. As 
small­volume manufacturers, the Lamborghini and Bentley brands 
each have an independent fleet for the purposes of the European CO? 
legislation; Bentley complied with its individual target, Lamborghini 
was slightly above its target. 
CO? emissions from the Volkswagen Group’s new passenger car fleet 
outside the EU break down as follows:
In the USA, the fleet emissions figure is 163.1 g CO?/km (Audi/VW 
calendar year; not including Volkswagen of America (VWoA)), in 
China 149.6 g CO?/km (Volkswagen Group (Import) Co. Ltd. (VGIC) + 
Shanghai Volkswagen (SVW) + First Automotive Works (FAW­VW)), and 
in Brazil 129 g CO?/km.
*  Subject to official publication by the EU Commission in the annual  
CO? fleet monitoring statistics.
CO? EMISSIONS  1, 2
of the Volkswagen Group’s European (EU28) new Passenger Car Fleet
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
120 1,2
1221,2
1211,2
126
129
0 30 60 90 120 150
1  This figure is the volume-weighted average of all specific CO? emissions from new passenger 
cars registered for the first time in the respective calendar year, based on the calculation logic 
defined in EU Regulation 443/2009 (“NEDC test cycle”).
2  Subject to official publication by the European Commission.
As a result of a continuous rise in production volumes, our overall 
energy consumption has increased since 2010. At the same time, 
we have been able to reduce our energy consumption per vehicle by 
–17.9% since 2010, from 2,519 kWh to 2,069 kWh. Over the past year, 
we have reduced energy consumption per vehicle by –1.0% compared 
with the previous year.
Our overall consumption of electrical energy has risen in comparison 
with 2010, even though we have taken various efficiency­enhancing 
measures to successfully reduce our electricity consumption per 
vehicle since 2010.
Heat consumption is subdivided into space heating demand for 
production and non­production areas in manufacturing facilities, and 
heating demand for technical processes. Since space heating accounts 
for the greater proportion of the total heating demand, weather con­
ditions have a major impact on trends in overall heating demand. Our 
absolute heat consumption has risen slightly since 2010.
Energy, CO?  
and Climate Change  

Page 60
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
60
Products and Production  |  energy, co?  and cLiMate change  
Increased production volumes and downstream procedures for the 
thermal afterburning of VOC emissions from paint shops resulted in 
higher consumption of gases used to fuel manufacturing processes. 
This went hand in hand with a slight deterioration in the specific 
value per vehicle.  
ENERGY CONSUMPTION*
in million MWh/year
2017
2016
2010
Other divisions
Cars and light 
commercial vehicles
Electricity
Heat
Fuel gases for 
manufacturing processes
0 3 6 9 12 15
12.58
7.04
4.63
12.37
4.25
6.88
9.45
6.46
3.47
* Cars and light commercial vehicles and other divisions.
ENERGY CONSUMPTION*
in kWh/vehicle
2017
2016
2010
Electricity
Heat
Fuel gases for manufacturing processes
1,197
855
467
0 200 400 600 800 1,000 1,200
1,060
587
421
1,088
402
 599
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
 
Further information on sustainable electricity generation and  
procurement can be found at: 
– Lamborghini | trigeneration system (cchP) and biogas  
– Ducati | trigeneration plant  
– MAN | chP Munich 
 
Volkswagen ag supported the inees research project by providing 20 VW e-up! cars. VW e-up! energy consumption in kWh/100 km:  
11.7 (combined); co? emissions in g/km: 0 (combined); co? efficiency class: a+.

Page 61
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
61
Products and Production  |  energy, co?  and cLiMate change  Products and Production  |  energy, co?  and cLiMate change  
Since 2011, VW Kraftwerk GmbH has been investing in the ongoing 
development of renewables and the construction of highly efficient 
combined heat and power (CHP) plants driven by natural gas. Thus in 
the period to 2016, the company invested around €26 million in renew­
ables such as wind farms and photovoltaic power plants. As part of 
our fuel conversion strategy, VW Kraftwerk GmbH also invested some 
€15 million in a CHP plant in Braunschweig and some €65 million in a 
gas and steam turbine (combined­cycle) plant in Kassel. Furthermore, 
in addition to the company’s own electricity generation activities, we 
are already implementing an increasingly widespread energy pro­
gram for the Volkswagen Group’s production sites in Germany using 
carbon­neutral Volkswagen Naturstrom®. The electricity is generated 
from 100 % renewable energy sources. It is backed up by certificates 
of origin, validated for each user by the German Federal Environment 
Agency (UBA). Contractual agreements have already been signed for 
supplying Volkswagen Naturstrom® to other sites. Over the next few 
years, VW Kraftwerk GmbH will also be looking to invest in new com­
bined­cycle power plants in Wolfsburg, and in the further development 
of renewables.
As an example of such development, once we have received approval 
for the construction and operation of certified wind power plants with 
a total capacity of 12.8 MW at our MAN Salzgitter site, we are planning 
to take part in the Renewable Energy Act (EEG) tendering process in 
2018. Once our bid has been accepted under the EEG tendering pro­
cess, we can start to build the wind farm.
Despite the inclusion of new production sites (along with the associat­
ed increase in energy consumption), direct CO? emissions in the cars 
and light commercial vehicles category, and indeed across the Group 
as a whole, have been falling since 2010. 
Direct CO? emissions are associated with the combustion of fossil 
fuels, the use of which we have successfully reduced. This reduction in 
the absolute volume of emissions goes hand in hand with the decline 
in direct CO? emissions per vehicle since 2010.
DIRECT CO? EMISSIONS SCOPE 1* 
in million tonnes/year
2017
2016
2010
4.23
4.20
4.32
Other divisionsCars and light commercial vehicles
0 1 2 3 4 5
* Cars and light commercial vehicles and other divisions.
DIRECT CO? EMISSIONS SCOPE 1* 
in kg/vehicle
2017
2016
2010
395
376
588
0 100 200 300 400 500 600
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
CO? emissions (Scope 1 and 2) have fallen since 2010, thanks to 
improved energy efficiency and a reduced­carbon energy supply. As 
a result, we have been able to reduce CO? emissions per vehicle by 
–26.1% since 2010, from 1,096 kg to 810 kg of CO?. Last year alone, 
we were able to reduce CO? emissions per vehicle by –8.3% compared 
with the previous year.
Volkswagen AG operates power stations and boiler plants, which gen­
erate heat and electricity for production facilities owned by Volkswa­
gen AG and third parties. CO? emissions from these power stations 
and boiler plants are included in the total CO? emissions figure for our 
Group by assessing the heat and energy consumption of our produc­
tion facilities using suitable CO? emission factors.
CO2 EMISSIONS SCOPE 1 AND 2* 
in million tonnes/year
2017
2016
2010
9.51
9.11
8.04
Other divisionsCars and light commercial vehicles
0 2 4 6 8 10
* Cars and light commercial vehicles and other divisions.
CO2 EMISSIONS SCOPE 1 AND 2* 
in kg/vehicle
2017
2016
2010
0 200 400 600 800 1.000 1.200
883
810
1,096
, ,
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
We have not taken direct CO? emissions from company cars and 
official works vehicles into account. We are currently working on 
standardized methods for recording emissions from our company­car 
fleet around the world. Preliminary calculations for Volkswagen 
Deutschland and Audi indicate a 2.6% increase in total CO? emissions 
in the footprint under investigation. 
Not shown here are Group carbon offset projects equating to 6,577 t of 
CO? reductions.
On the other hand, the stated CO? emissions do not include emissions 
produced by Volkswagen AG power plants in the course of supplying 
district heating or power to third parties. In 2016, these emissions 
amounted to 379,516 t of CO?.

Page 62
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
62
Products and Production  |  energy, co?  and cLiMate change  
In line with the Scope 3 standards published by the World  Business 
Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) and the World 
Resources Institute (WRI), we report CO? emissions for 12 out of a 
total of 15 Scope 3 categories. Our calculations have revealed that the 
“Purchased goods and services” and “Use phase” emission categories 
account for around 92% of all Scope 3 emissions. CO? emissions in 
the use phase are calculated on the basis of a Group fleet value repre­
senting the global vehicle population in the four major regions (EU28, 
USA, Brazil and China). In order to provide as complete a picture as 
possible, we also collect data on emissions in this category that are 
produced during the production and transportation of fuels (“well to 
tank” emissions).
GHG EMISSIONS SCOPE 3
in the Volkswagen Group (cars and light commercial vehicles)
20171 20161
No. Category tonnes  CO?  % tonnes  CO?  %
1 Purchased goods and services 64,139,109 18.9 59,415,034 18.2
2 capital goods 13,846,493 4.1 13,767,328 4.2
3 Fuel/energy 1,399,741 0.4 1,363,103 0.4
4 upstream transportation and distribution 2,3 3,795,390 1.1 3,795,390 1.2
5 Waste generated in operations 2,259,423 0.7 2,137,095 0.7
6 Business travel 685,148 0.2 668,894 0.2
7 employee commuting 976,650 0.3 953,480 0.3
8 upstream leased assets 3 not reported — not reported —
9 downstream transportation and distribution ? not reported — not reported —
10 Processing of sold products 13,000 0.004 13,000 0.004
11 use phase (150,000 km)5 249,466,650 73.3 241,679,689 73.6
12 end-of-life treatment 2 1,114,154 0.3 1,606,582 0.5
13 downstream leased assets 4 942,053 0.3 1,033,703 0.3
14 Franchises 1,550,000 0.5 1,550,000 0.5
15 investments not reported — not reported —
Total of reported Scope 3 emissions 340,187,811 100 328,408,918 100
¹ Individual figures are rounded. This may lead to minor discrepancies in the sum total.
² Figure based on the 2017 CDP report – the figure for 2017 will appear in the 2018 CDP report.
³ Upstream.
? Downstream.
? Well-to-Wheel.
In our quest to improve our environmental performance, we do not 
limit our efforts to the interiors of our production facilities, we also 
look at our Group real estate as a whole. In 2017, Volkswagen Immo­
bilien GmbH formulated a holistic sustainability model. Not only does 
the model focus on the entire life cycle of each property, including 
construction, operation and maintenance; it also examines how each 
asset is funded. By taking this holistic approach, we aim to make a 
significant contribution to the Group’s strategy. We would also like to 
take a leading role in the residential real­estate sector as a sustainable 
investor in the region. In 2017, we completed a number of construc­
tion projects that complied with our own “Blue Building” sustainability 
standard and subsequently leased them in full. 
Further information on our BLue BuiLding concept and other  
sustainable building approaches can be found at: 
https://www.vwimmobilien.de/wohnen/neubauprojekte/blue-building.html 
– Porsche | sustainable Building  
– Lamborghini | Leed office building
 

Page 63
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
63
Products and Production  |  energy, co?  and cLiMate change  Products and Production  |  energy, co?  and cLiMate change  
EMISSIONS TRADING
32 of our Group locations take part in European emissions trading. 
For 2017, a total of 1,116,441 emissions certificates were allocated to 
the Volkswagen Group free of charge (69,977 fewer than in the previ­
ous year).
The European Commission is planning further modifications in emis­
sions trading when the fourth trading period begins (from 2021) that 
may lead to reinforcement of the system and thus to price increases in 
the certificates. In addition to the EU member states, other countries 
in which the Volkswagen Group has production sites are also consid­
ering introducing an emissions trading system. Seven corresponding 
pilot projects are running in China, for example, although they have 
not so far affected the Volkswagen Group. The Chinese government 
officially implemented a national emissions trading system at the end 
of 2017. Initially, the impact will only be on the energy generation 
sector; a gradual expansion is being planned.  
NEW TEST PROCEDURES FOR MEASURING EXHAUST 
EMISSIONS AND FUEL CONSUMPTION
Since 1 September 2017, new procedures have been in place for 
measuring exhaust­gas emissions (such as particulates and nitrogen 
oxides) and consumption (CO?) by new vehicle models in the EU. On 
test benches, the new WLTP standard is replacing the old NEDC test 
cycle. The new procedure is more dynamic and should better reflect 
on­the­road driving conditions in the laboratory. A significant inno­
vation in the measurement of fuel consumption: in the future, every 
vehicle will also be assigned an individual CO? value. Under the NEDC 
standard, CO? values were arranged in families. 
The abbreviation WLTP stands for “Worldwide Harmonized Light Duty 
Vehicles Test Procedure”. The new test cycle was introduced in order to 
establish internationally standardized CO? emission measurements 
for passenger cars and light commercial vehicles, and to provide a 
more realistic picture of levels of CO? emissions and fuel consumption 
for end­customers. 
The second stage of the WLTP cycle’s introductory phase is due to start 
on 1 September 2018, at which point all new vehicles will have to be 
tested using the WLTP’s fuel consumption and exhaust­gas emission 
testing methods.
In addition, under what is known as Real Driving Emissions (RDE) 
legislation, on­the­road threshold values for particulates (PN) and 
nitrogen oxides will also come into force for the first time. This means 
that for the first time, exhaust­gas emission limits will not only apply 
on the test bench, but also on the road.
e-golf (100 kW/136 Ps) – energy consumption in kWh/100 km:  
12.7 (combined); co? emissions in g/km: 0 (combined); co? efficiency 
class: a+.
up! tsi BMt – fuel consumption in l/100 km: urban 5.5 /  
extra-urban 3.8 / combined 4.4; co? emissions in g/km: 101 (combined); 
co? efficiency class: B.

Page 64
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
64
Products and Production  |  Production and Logistics
Production and 
Logistics
The “Ecologically Exemplary Production” initiative is firmly anchored 
in our production strategy, which is derived from our Group strategy. 
As part of this initiative, we will be working to achieve four key objec­
tives by 2025:
 § Setting and achieving ambitious environmental targets for 
 production
 § Developing a long­term vision for environmental targets in 
 production and rolling it out across the Group
 § Improving employees’ environmental awareness and incorporating 
relevant environmental aspects into Group processes
 § Achieving top positions in prestigious environmental rankings
 
With this in mind, we have set ourselves the ambitious goal of 
reducing levels of the five key environmental indicators per vehicle 
manufactured – energy and water consumption, waste for disposal, 
CO? and VOC emissions – by 45% by 2025 (compared with the 2010 
baseline). This target applies to all the Group’s production sites and 
builds on the eco­friendly production process requirements defined 
in our Group Environmental Principles.
In addition to continuously reducing these five environmental indi­
cators, we are also actively pursuing other initiatives which aim to 
improve our material processing efficiency, recycling levels, environ­
mental protection in logistics, and nature conservation.  
 
MATERIAL INPUT AND RECYCLING
In our efforts to achieve sustainable production, the use of low­impact 
raw materials plays an important role in reducing our consumption of 
natural resources. 
To manufacture our vehicles, we need production materials com­
prised of renewable and non­renewable resources. Our efforts to 
conserve resources over the entire life cycle of our vehicles start at the 
earliest development stage. By taking this approach, we can continu­
ously reduce the environmental impacts of the materials we use by 
prioritizing renewable and secondary raw materials. 
This is why we focus on using renewable raw materials in vehicle pro­
duction: wherever possible, our Group brands use natural­fiber­based 
raw materials such as flax, cotton, wood, cellulose and hemp in floor 
insulation, trunk linings, door and side­panel trims, and hood insula­
tion. But even when using these renewable materials, we adhere to 
Further information on our brands’ “ecologically exemplary Production”  
initiative can be found at: 
– Volkswagen | think Blue. Factory  
– ŠKODA | greenFuture  
– Indien | think Blue. Factory  
– China | chP of saic VoLKsWagen
strict sustainability standards: in certain instances, negative envi­
ronmental impacts based on water, fertilizer, energy or land require­
ments, not to mention social factors such as competition with food 
crops, may militate against the use of renewable raw materials.
Lightweight body­shell production is a strategic development pri­
ority. In terms of functionality, quality, safety and environmental 
compatibility, we are either improving our existing products or de­
signing brand­new ones. We use hot­formed, high­strength steels in 
production models. While a lot of energy is required to manufacture 
these products, the lighter vehicle bodies make it possible to reduce 
CO? emissions and hence improve our products’ environmental im­
pact. We are also pursuing a composite materials approach for certain 
vehicles and platforms, using a range of different materials in one 
body shell. When developing new platforms, we also use lightweight 
materials such as aluminium. 
 
 
Another element in our sustainable use of materials is the introduc­
tion of closed­loop material cycles in our production processes. 
Instead of primary raw materials, we increasingly rely on recycled 
materials. These are obtained from production residues or end­of­
life materials – but must meet exactly the same quality standards as 
primary raw materials. 
Recycling enables us to further reduce our products’ environmental 
impact, while at the same time conserving resources. For example, 
even at the development stage of new vehicles, we pay attention to the 
recyclability of the required materials, the use of high­quality recycled 
materials and the avoidance of pollutants. This means that end­of­life 
vehicles can be 85% recycled and 95% recovered. 
Other measures that are steadily improving our vehicles’ environmen­
tal performance focus on, for example, extending the battery life of 
lithium­ion batteries and introducing closed­loop recycling of their 
materials.
The implementation of the Aluminium Closed Loop Project in 2017 
was the first time we had organized a closed loop for aluminium with 
non­Group suppliers. The project returned sheet aluminium scrap 
from our press shops directly to suppliers for subsequent reuse in 
vehicles.
To calculate the proportion of recycled materials in an entire vehicle, 
we identify the materials in all of the vehicle’s components, together 
with their recycled material content, and add them up. In order to do 
this, we depend on reliable information obtained directly from our 
suppliers, as well as data from industry­specific associations. 
Further information on our brands’ lightweight body shell construction  
can be found at: 
– Scania | Light truck 

Page 65
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
65
Products and Production  |  Production and Logistics Products and Production  |  Production and Logistics
INPUT MATERIALS AND PRIMARY PRODUCTS  
AS ILLUSTRATED BY THE EXAMPLE OF THE VW POLO (2017)
Steel and iron materials 63.3%
Polymer materials 20.4%
Light alloys 6.3%
Operating uids and 
auxiliary materials 2.0%
Composites and 
other materials 3.4%
Nonferrous metals 2.9%
Process polymers 1.6%
Electronics 0.1%
 
 
WATER
Conserving our planet’s freshwater reserves is one of the  pivotal 
 requirements for preserving the basic necessities of life. Water 
resources are already scarce in many parts of the world, and access 
to clean drinking water is an increasingly pressing problem for 
large  sections of the global population. During our products’ use 
phase, water consumption only plays a minor role. The supply chain 
is a  significant consumer of water, however, especially during the 
extraction or creation of raw materials. We have no direct influence 
over this upstream phase. Consequently, to reduce our water con­
sumption, we are focusing on areas which we can influence directly: 
our production plants. Our latest review indicates that 55% (around 
22  million m³) of our entire freshwater consumption is attributable 
to sites located in regions where groundwater resources are at risk. 
The water management strategy adopted by the Corporate Environ­
ment & Energy Steering Committee defines four areas of activity:  
 § ensuring safe, reliable water supply and disposal by protecting 
groundwater resources from pollutants, 
 § using water efficiently throughout the product life cycle by imple­
menting closed loops, 
 § engaging in social and environmental projects to protect water 
resources and promote public environmental awareness, 
 § enhancing transparency by supporting the CEO Water Mandate 
and the CDP Water Disclosure Project. In 2017, we were included 
on the CDP Water A­List. The list includes those companies which 
were identified over the last CDP reporting year as global leaders 
in sustainable water management. 
Our in­house White Paper defines key requirements for the vari­
ous processes in our production sequence. These requirements are 
helping us implement sustainable, water­efficient processes across the 
entire Group. 
FRESHWATER AND WASTEWATER*
in million m³/year
2017
2016
2010
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
Freshwater volume
Wastewater volume Other divisions
Cars and light commercial vehicles
53.77
32.85
52.25
32.17
37.23
27.93
* Cars and light commercial vehicles and other divisions.
FRESHWATER AND WASTEWATER*
in m³/vehicle
2017
2016
2010
0 1 2 3 4 5
Freshwater volume
Wastewater volume
3.76
2.93
3.89
2.96
4.54
3.76
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
Depending on where wastewater is purified, we make a distinction 
between locations that act as so­called “indirect dischargers” by 
discharging wastewater into municipal sewers for further purification, 
and those that act as so­called “direct dischargers” by treating their 
own wastewater in­house and then discharging the purified waste­
water directly into a body of water.
The absolute demand for freshwater in our Group has risen over the 
last few years. This is due not only to the inclusion of new locations in 
our reporting system, but also to the growing numbers of passenger 
cars and light commercial vehicles we are manufacturing. On the other 
hand, freshwater consumption per vehicle has steadily declined since 
2010, thanks to a raft of recycling initiatives and the introduction of 
manufacturing techniques that use minimal water. In 2017, we were 
able to reduce water consumption per vehicle to 3.76 m³ from 3.89 m³ 
in 2016.

Page 66
66
Products and Production  |  Production and Logistics
VoLKsWagen grouP sustainaBiLity rePort 2017
Wastewater volumes show a similar trend to the volume of freshwater 
consumption. Differences in freshwater and wastewater volumes are 
caused by evaporation losses from cooling towers and in the manufac­
turing process. We have been able to reduce the volume of wastewater 
per car and light commercial vehicle produced by 22% since 2010, 
from 3.76 m³ to 2.92 m³ in 2017.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGES 1, 2
in million m³/year
2017
2016
2015
0 5 10 15 20 25
10.27
20.95
 8.99
 21.29
 9.08
21.90
Receiving stream
Municipal euent treatment plant
1 Cars and light commercial vehicles. 
2 Before 2013, differentiated figures for the Group as a whole were not yet available.
WATER WITHDRAWAL BY SOURCE 1, 2
in million m³/year
2017
2016
2015
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
Groundwater
Rainwater/surface water
Purchased freshwater
6.60
1.30
32.30
6.58
32.02
1.17
7.01
 1.04
 32.30
1 Cars and light commercial vehicles. 
2 Before 2013, differentiated figures for the Group as a whole were not yet available.
WASTE
Making steadily more efficient use of resources means concentrating 
on avoidance, recovery and recycling – for example by introducing 
intelligent concepts for a closed­loop economy. 
As part of our waste strategy, we aim to use materials and products 
more and more efficiently, thereby reducing the volume of waste 
per unit manufactured and recycling any unavoidable waste to high 
 standards. Specifically, this entails:  
 § Avoiding waste generation by optimizing production and ancillary 
processes and/or increasing material utilization levels (material 
efficiency),
 § Reducing waste volumes by localizing waste treatment at our sites,
 § Prioritizing waste recycling and reducing the amount of waste for 
disposal. 
To optimize our waste management, we are making great efforts to 
use digital waste management systems across all our divisions. Such 
systems are already used to control waste management processes in 
all German factories and some of the other European factories oper­
ated by the Volkswagen, Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles, Porsche, 
Audi, MAN and Scania brands, and to facilitate the state­monitored 
disposal of hazardous waste in particular (Electronic Government). 
We are planning to roll out these systems in the rest of Europe and 
subsequently across regions around the world.
In 2015, we introduced waste disposal audits at many of our sites, 
in order to review our waste management and recycling processes. 
For these audits, we jointly developed a standardized procedure in 
collaboration with other vehicle manufacturers (original equipment 
manufacturers or OEMs) and major suppliers. Since then, we have 
been carrying out regular audits of locations and OEMs in Germany 
and the rest of Europe. In the regions, we have also started monitoring 
waste disposal services by introducing audits. We trained potential 
 auditors at our sites in eastern Europe, Spain and Portugal with the 
aim of setting a common benchmark for the quality standards ex­
pected of waste disposal services, carrying out quality­assured audits, 
and ensuring that the results can also be used by other OEMs and 
suppliers. 
Waste from production, logistics and workshops, as well as the 
Technical Development department, is recycled to high standards. 
For the recycling of potentially lucrative waste such as paper, plastics, 
wood or metals (described internally as recyclable waste materials), 
our  Procurement function has rolled out a Group­wide system that 
improves safety throughout the entire process.  
Further information on our brands’ closed loop economy concepts  
can be found at: 
– Audi | aluminium closed Loop  
 

Page 67
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
67
Products and Production  |  Production and Logistics Products and Production  |  Production and Logistics
In the passenger cars and light commercial vehicles category, rising 
production volumes since 2010 have resulted in an increase in the 
total volume of hazardous waste, while the total volume of non­ 
hazardous waste has declined. Similarly, we were able to reduce the 
volume of waste for disposal per vehicle from 15.2 kg in 2016 to 
13.2 kg in 2017. This represents a 43.3% reduction compared with 
the 2010 baseline.
Consequently, the proportion of waste for recycling – excluding 
 metallic waste – rose from around 66% in 2010 to around 81% in 2017. 
This increase in the proportion of recycled waste is also the result of 
the waste management strategy adopted within our Group, which 
aims to improve waste recycling rates.
The absolute quantity of metallic “recyclable waste materials” has also 
risen due to increased production volumes across the Group since 
the start of the reporting period in 2010. However, in 2017 we were 
able to reduce the volume per vehicle by 4% compared to 2010. Power 
stations operated by Volkswagen Kraftwerk GmbH inevitably produce 
power plant residues. In the last reporting year, we were able to recycle 
around 130,000 t of these residues.
WASTE FOR DISPOSAL¹, ² 
in tonnes/year
2017
2016
2010
0 30.000 60.000 90.000 120.000, , , ,
59,056
97,375
55,376
114,078
103,037
71,094
Non-hazardous waste 
for disposal
Other divisions Cars and light commercial 
vehicles
Hazardous waste for disposal
¹  The bars for “Non-hazardous waste for disposal” and “Hazardous waste for disposal” indicate 
the share attributable to other Group divisions. This is not depicted for the other fractions, 
however, due to their minimal share in these amounts.
2 Cars and light commercial vehicles and other divisions.
 information on "waste for recycling" as well as other key figures from the product 
and production chapter can be found in the appendix from p. 96.
WASTE FOR DISPOSAL* 
in kg/vehicle
2017
2016
2010
0 3 6 9 12 15
Non-hazardous waste for disposal
Hazardous waste for disposal
4.93
8.29
4.94
10.27
14.03
9.27
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
 
VOLATILE ORGANIC COMPOUNDS  
Coating processes are the main producers of VOC emissions.  Modern 
paintshops use coating and process materials containing fewer sol­
vents. During coating processes, we also take steps to collect and/or 
eliminate any solvents emitted. To do this, we usually use a procedure 
involving thermal afterburning of the exhaust air downstream of the 
actual coating process. 
Despite the increase in vehicle production since 2010 and the asso­
ciated increase in the number of coating operations, we were able to 
reduce absolute VOC emissions by 26.0%. We have also significantly 
reduced emissions per vehicle since 2010, by 49.4%.
VOC EMISSIONS* 
in tonnes/year
2017
2016
2010
Other divisionsCars and light commercial vehicles
0 10,000 20,000 30,000 40,000
26,280
23,374
30,347
* Cars and light commercial vehicles and other divisions.
VOC EMISSIONS* 
in kg/vehicle
0 1 2 3 4
2017
2016
2010
2.47
2.09
4.13
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.

Page 68
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
68
Products and Production  |  Production andLogistics 
GREEN LOGISTICS  
Logistics contributes to our Group’s eco-friendly orientation by ana-
lyzing the entire transport chain in terms of emissions. 
Our Green Logistics initiative took an approach based on what is 
known as the A-S-I-F model, originally developed by GIZ (Deutsche 
Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit GmbH). The aim is to 
promote alternative modes of transportation, as well as sustainable, 
energy-efficient transport systems, in order to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
In brief, this provides Logistics with the following guidelines for 
 implementing specific measures: 
A – Avoid: avoid transportation wherever possible 
S –  Shift: move over to a more environmentally compatible  
mode of transport
I – Improve: use better or more modern technology 
F – Fuels: use alternative drive systems
This model was used to define universally valid internal environ-
mental prin ciples, from which we then developed strategic policies 
and guidelines. These are intended to ensure that our environmental 
requirements are implemented in our logistical processes worldwide.
An important starting point for reducing CO2 emissions is the selec-
tion of the mode of transport. One of the most efficient options in 
terms of transport capacity is maritime transport. To further improve 
the environmental sustainability of ship transport, Volkswagen Kon-
zernlogistik will put two charter ships powered by liquefied natural 
gas (LNG) into service from 2019. 
Starting in 2019, two eco-friendly vehicle transporters, powered by an 
engine developed by MAN Diesel & Turbo, will travel between Emden 
in Germany and North America.
In September 2017, we held an LNG Truck Day to dispel doubts and 
reservations regarding the new technology and actively support the 
expansion of the LNG fuel station network in Germany. Among others, 
regional freight forwarders, gas providers and representatives from 
the German Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure 
and the Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy took part. 
Furthermore, since 2014, we have gradually been adopting the Euro 5 
exhaust emissions standard as the minimum standard for all new 
contracts in Volkswagen AG’s European freight forwarding business. 
All in all the aforementioned measures show a selection of the various 
Green Logistics activities within the company and let the Volkswagen 
Group come closer to its ambitious goals for the future. 
Further information on our brands’ “Ecologically Exemplary Production” initiative 
can be found at: 
– Audi | dBeco plus 
NATURE CONSERVATION  
Inevitably, industrial growth has an impact on natural resources. This 
is why we do not simply treat measures to preserve biodiversity in 
our Group as a temporary project; they have been an integral part of 
our environmental management strategy for years.
Biodiversity signifies the variety of life on our planet, encapsulating 
the multiplicity of species, genetic differences within species, and 
the diversity of ecosystems. We rely on it as the basis for our contin-
ued existence: healthy food, clean water, fertile soils and a balanced 
climate. Because of the worldwide decline of biodiversity, the United 
Nations declared the current decade to be the “UN Decade on Biodi-
versity”.
Since 2007, we have been committed to the protection of biodiversity 
at Group locations around the world. The objectives of more than 
80 projects across eight brands range from protecting water resources 
and various species through to reforestation and environmental edu-
cation. Representatives of and institutes in the respective regions are 
frequently involved, as are NGOs and scientific advisers. 
Volkswagen has been committed to protecting biodiversity since 2007 
and is a founder member of the Biodiversity in Good Company e.V. 
initiative. In our mission statement, we have pledged to support the 
protection of species across all our locations. To do so, we work closely 
together with our local suppliers. Our membership of the Biodiversity 
in Good Company e.V. initiative is temporarily on hold as a result of 
the diesel issue.
The protection of biodiversity is an integral part of our environmental 
management strategy. By reducing greenhouse gas emissions and 
using resources as efficiently as possible, we are helping to achieve 
the objectives set down in the UN Convention on Biological  Diversity 
(CBD). To raise public awareness of the importance of protecting 
species, and to increase general knowledge on the subject, Volkswagen 
is making efforts to network with major players in business, politics, 
civil society and academia. 
To consolidate our commitment to biodiversity across the Group, 
we have, among other things, appointed a biodiversity officer and 
commissioned external assessments of the risks to water, the soil and 
biodiversity across our brands. Based on this work, we are currently 
formulating targets and methods for making our active nature con-
servation work more transparent and accountable in the future, and 
for better assessing the effectiveness of our many projects.  
 
Volkswagen FS AG is currently engaged in several projects with 
Naturschutzbund Deutschland e.V. (NABU) including, for  example, a 
peatland conservation project. In addition to supporting the  German 
Peatland Conservation Fund (13 national project areas to date), 
we also sponsor the European Union’s LIFE Peat Restore Project, 
 organized jointly by NABU with partners in Poland, Lithuania, Latvia 
and Estonia.   
Further information can be found in the annex: 
Plants in the vicinity of nature conservation areas  p. 99.
Further information about nature conservation projects can be found  
on our csr world map as well as under: 
– Lamborghini | Lamborghini for biodiversity  
– Ducati | Bee monitoring  
–  Volkswagen Financial Services | Volkswagen and german nature  
and Biodiversity conservation union (naBu)

Page 69
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
69
Products and Production  |  Production andLogistics Products and Production  |  Product and road saFety
Product and 
Road Safety
We want to keep our customers as safe as possible on the road by 
offering them a comprehensive range of efficient, affordable and 
practical powertrain technologies combined with smart mobility 
concepts. These embrace passive and active vehicle safety systems, as 
well as climate and environmental protection. 
QUALITY ASSURANCE AND PRODUCT SAFETY  
Our customers attach the utmost importance to product safety. So we 
take a meticulous approach to quality assurance along the entire value 
chain, from procurement right through to sales.
Right at the start, when a vehicle is first being developed, we use stan­
dardized processes to exclude potential use risks. At the next stage, 
production, our product safety officers rely on lessons­learned processes 
to ensure that our products stay safe. Because the approach followed by 
our product safety officers has proved its worth, we are now gradually im­
plementing it among our suppliers, hence along our entire supply chain.
We have established quality specifications for the materials and operating 
fluids we use that focus not only on their functional properties but also 
on their longevity. These specifications provide the framework within 
which Volkswagen’s materials specialists, for example, define and verify 
components’ resistance to aggressive media.
Odors and emissions from plastic components inside the vehicle can im­
pair passengers’ wellbeing. To avoid these issues, we check the properties 
of the materials and components we use with great care. Our internal 
Group standard VW 50180 sets down our requirements for material 
characteristics. And suppliers must demonstrate that they are complying 
with these requirements by the sample prototype inspection stage at the 
very latest. Suppliers’ compliance data for selected components used in 
Group vehicles is further verified in our laboratories. In addition to check­
ing materials and components, we also evaluate odors and emissions in 
the passenger compartment when we start production of new concept 
vehicles and production vehicles.
More and more of us live in cities. Traffic noise impairs our quality of life. 
We want to reduce emissions not only inside our vehicles, but also wher­
ever the use of vehicles is increasing. For this reason, we are working to 
produce reliable forecasts of the potential impacts of future solutions on 
urban air quality, noise pollution and traffic flow (impact assessments). 
This is where models and simulations make an important contribution 
by helping us to develop the right solutions for the future – solutions that 
are more precisely tailored and optimized for their intended purposes.
But we are also going one step further. We are using a specially developed 
tool to calculate noise pollution levels in cities and further develop our 
understanding of the role of the automobile, assess interactions between 
different noise sources, and evaluate various measures for reducing noise. 
Our aim is to improve the noise situation for urban residents in general 
by entering into dialog with cities and fellow noise emitters.
Volkswagen Group companies are obliged by law to provide users of their 
products with appropriate information about the risks that may arise 
from their foreseeable misuse, and even from their intended use. Our 
Group companies fulfill this obligation by providing instruction manuals 
and, in specific instances, placing warning stickers inside the vehicle. 
Further more, since 1 December 2011, all passenger vehicles manufac­
tured in Germany must carry a weight­based efficiency label similar to 
the energy consumption labels used for household appliances. Efficiency 
ratings range from A+ (highly efficient) to G (inefficient). The label also 
informs users of fuel consumption, annual fuel costs, CO? emissions and 
annual tax charges under Germany’s CO?­based vehicle tax. In the case of 
electric vehicles, the label provides information on energy consumption. 
All of our brands publish the details of their models’ fuel consumption 
and CO? emissions on their websites. 
SAFE VEHICLES AND ROAD SAFETY  
The ultimate aim of our Vision Zero is: zero fatalities or severe injuries 
in or due to vehicles manufactured by the Volkswagen Group. To 
 progress towards this vision, we have set ourselves the following goals:
 § avoidable accidents should not happen,
 § unavoidable accidents will be positively mitigated,
 § the severity of accidents will be minimized.
 
To achieve these goals, the Group’s accident researchers collect data 
from real­world traffic accidents. Their investigations include:
 § technical analyses of the vehicles involved to establish the technical 
severity of the accident,
 § medical analyses of injuries suffered by people involved in the 
accident,
 § psychological analyses of the circumstances surrounding the 
 accident.
 
We use the findings of these analyses to develop measures to protect 
people inside and outside the vehicle. These include the development 
of bodywork concepts and occupant retention systems, as well as new 
driver assistance systems capable of avoiding accidents or mitigating 
their consequences.
In best­case scenarios, the resulting active systems help to avoid 
accidents completely. Especially noteworthy are emergency braking 
systems (such as Front Assist) and lane­keeping systems (such as Lane 
Assist). Where the collision turns out to be unavoidable, a raft of pas­
sive systems ensures that the consequences of the accident for vehicle 
occupants are either obviated or mitigated. In particular, the coordi­
nated interaction of the vehicle structure with the occupant retention 
system plays a central role in our thinking.
In our efforts to make mobility safer, we contribute our expertise and 
experience to the German Road Safety Council (DVR) – of which we are 
an active member – and to major conferences on vehicle safety held 
around the world.  

Page 70


Page 71
The Volkswagen Group can look back on a long tradition of cultivating responsible  
relationships with our employees and our neighbors, as well as responding to the  
concerns of society as voiced by people outside the company. Through initiatives such  
as the 4-day week in the 1990s, which effectively rescued 30,000 jobs, or the creation of 
4,200 new jobs for the unemployed in 2002 as part of our Auto5000 program, we have 
repeatedly demonstrated our commitment to and equal prioritization of commercial 
competitiveness, job security and corporate social responsibility
People and 
Responsibility

Page 72
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
72
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  ManageMent aPPRoach
Management Approach
Volkswagen seeks to be a responsible employer and a good corporate 
citizen. Reliability, trustworthiness and fairness are our watchwords – 
no matter whether we are talking to individual employees, negotiating 
with collective representative bodies, collaborating with regional part-
ners in local infrastructure development projects, or cooperating with 
civil society initiatives and associations. Through these endeavors to 
foster sustainability and cultivate mutual understanding, as a socially 
responsible company, Volkswagen is seeking to contribute to the reali-
zation of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals.
Our new “Empower to transform” human resources strategy, which 
the Group’s Board of Management approved in October 2016, con-
tinues this long tradition. The strategy is intended to ensure that the 
Group, our brands and our workforce are well placed to adapt to the 
ever more rapidly evolving challenges we are facing. In this era of 
digital transformation and connected mobility, the paramount goal 
of our human resources strategy is to be seen as one of the most 
attractive employers in the world. In this way, we aim to help the 
Volkswagen Group become a global leader in sustainable mobility 
on an enduringly profitable basis.
We are well aware that it takes more than just good pay, a secure job 
and appealing work to make an employer attractive. This is one of 
the reasons we are constantly expanding our social engagement 
activities – as a good “corporate citizen”, we see ourselves as a local 
driver of growth, contributing to structural development, education 
and equal opportunities wherever we operate. Accordingly, support 
for social, cultural and community projects is a core element of our 
strategy at all 120 of the Group’s production sites.
HUMAN RESOURCES STRATEGY –  
“EMPOWER TO TRANSFORM” 
At the time of launching the Group’s TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 pro-
gram in 2016, we also introduced our new “We empower to perform” 
human resources strategy. Following a review of our strategic successes, 
this was then rebranded “Empower to transform” in November 2017. 
This strategy sets out five overarching objectives for personnel  
management in the Group:
 § The Volkswagen Group aims to be an excellent employer across  
all our brands and companies worldwide. 
 § Highly skilled and committed employees strive for excellence  
in innovation, value creation and customer focus. 
 § Sustainable work practices ensure optimal working conditions  
in factories and offices. 
 § An exemplary corporate culture creates a working atmosphere  
characterized by openness, mutual trust and cooperation.
 § While striving for operational excellence and adding strategic value, 
personnel management within the Group is strongly focused on 
employees.
 
In implementing this new strategy, the Volkswagen Group is con-
tinuing to pursue the successful key tenets of our human resources 
policy. As well as seeking to appropriately balance performance and 
remuneration, these include a strong stakeholder focus, comprehen-
sive employee participation rights, excellent training opportunities 
and the fostering of long-term service through systematic retention 
programs. Our new human resources strategy is also setting innova-
tive new trends. For instance, we are developing pioneering forms of 
work organization in our factories and offices, as well as new working 
time models to meet employees’ wishes for greater flexibility. 
the five action areas of our “empower to transform” strategy.

Page 73
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
73
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  ManageMent aPPRoach PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  ManageMent aPPRoach
At the same time as planning the socially responsible, systematic 
transformation of our human resources function, we are investing 
heavily in training and upskilling programs to carry our workforce 
forward into the digital future. We are continually expanding our 
preventive healthcare offerings. 
Volkswagen is also set to roll out a diversity management system across 
the entire Group by 2020. Different cultural circumstances in global 
markets and increasingly dynamic economic conditions mean that we 
need an ever-broader range of experiences, world views, problem-solv-
ing approaches and ideas for products. The growing diversity of our 
workforce offers potential for innovation which could be leveraged 
even more effectively in future.
Our human resources strategy also addresses the causes and conse-
quences of the diesel emissions issue. Various initiatives for transform-
ing our corporate culture are already in progress, aiming to establish 
flatter hierarchies, a more open form of collaboration and a more 
broadly entrepreneurial perspective across the Group’s divisions. 
Volkswagen’s personnel development system underwent a thorough 
review in 2017; it now provides more transparent routes into manage-
ment with a greater emphasis on individual responsibility. At the same 
time, our management principles were revised and new criteria for 
appointments to management positions were defined.
In the course of 2017 we also revised our Group-wide Code of Conduct, 
further expanded the compliance system and continued the rollout of 
the Code of Cooperation as key pillars of Group-wide cooperation. 
We are implementing our strategy in nine Group-wide strategic 
initiatives which form the key operationalization tools for our human 
resources program. These initiatives are systematically aligned with our 
five principal strategic action areas.
ALIGNMENT OF 9 STRATEGIC “EMPOWER TO TRANSFORM” INITIATIVES WITH STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES
PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT 4.0
Lean, ecient, forward-thinking 
HR organization
REALIGNMENT OF 
MANAGEMENT DEVELOPMENT
New management model, 
new appointment criteria
NEXT-LEVEL DIVERSITY
From advancing women to 
managing diversity
HEALTH
Maintaining and building physical 
and mental health
CORPORATE CULTURE
Code of Cooperation rollout
STRATEGIC SKILLS 
MANAGEMENT
Making better use of workforce skills
NEW APPROACHES TO 
PERSONNEL DEVELOPMENT
Individual career paths for a 
multifaceted world
EMPLOYER OF CHOICE
Attracting and retaining top talents
INNOVATIVE WORKING ENVIRONMENTS
Ideas for tomorrow’s workplace

Page 74
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
74
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  ManageMent aPPRoach
THE 9 STRATEGIC “EMPOWER TO TRANSFORM” INITIATIVES
Strategic initiative Action areas Goals and actions Deadline and status
innovative working environments occupational health & safety;
training and skills;
employer attractiveness;
participation and co-determination
innovative working practices in factories and offices;
strengthen participation and individual responsibility;
design technology around the workforce;
create modern working environments
ongoing / dec. 31, 2018
corporate culture diversity and equal opportunities;
social responsibility;
employer attractiveness;
participation and co-determination
create an open corporate culture based on flat  
hierarchies; foster transparency and participation
culture cascades to all levels of  
the group in 2017; 
continuing in 2018
new approaches to personnel  
development
training and skills; 
employer attractiveness;
participation and co-determination
More transparent routes into management with  
greater emphasis on individual responsibility
system devised in 2017; 
rollout in 2018
Realignment of management  
development
diversity and equal opportunities;
training and skills
new management model and new appointment crite-
ria; transparency about management vacancies
group-wide rollout during 2018
next-level diversity diversity and equal opportunities;
social responsibility;
training and skills
development of diversity and internationality international diversity targets 
came into force on Jan. 1, 2018;
targets to be adjusted during 2018;
ongoing systematic development 
of management approach
employer of choice diversity and equal opportunities;
employer attractiveness
improve external employer attractiveness and focus on 
new target groups in the context of digital transfor-
mation
ongoing / dec. 31, 2018
Personnel management 4.0 diversity and equal opportunities;
employer attractiveness;
participation and co-determination
digitalization of hR tools;
improve data transparency for employees;
create self-administration options for employees
concept created in 2017; 
rollout in 2018
health employer attractiveness;
human rights
development of preventive measures and healthcare ongoing / dec. 31, 2018
strategic skills management employer attractiveness;
participation and co-determination
systematic management of hR transformation;
better, skills-appropriate deployment of employees;
access to additional upskilling opportunities
system devised in 2017;
rollout in 2018

Page 75
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
75
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  ManageMent aPPRoach PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: excellent eMPloyeR
Strategic Objective: 
Excellent Employer
Seeking to be an attractive employer is not an end in itself. We will 
only be able to sustain the enduring commitment and motivation 
of our employees if we keep the promises we have made about the 
working conditions in our company. And only if we can make these 
promises visible to the outside world will we be perceived as attractive 
in an increasingly competitive talent market, and consequently be 
able to attract and retain the best people.
EMPLOYEE TURNOVER* 
at Volkswagen AG (in %)
2017 2016 2015 2014 2013
Women 0.4 0.3 0.4 0.3 0.3
Men 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4
Total 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4 0.4
* Not incl. age-related turnover.
Our “Empower to transform” strategy fuses the external and internal 
aspects of employer attractiveness by seamlessly reconciling the 
consistency of our employer’s promise with the real-world employee 
experience, that is, how our quality as an employer is actually per-
ceived by individuals on a day-to-day basis. 
Participation, individual responsibility and opportunities for person-
al growth are a very important part of our promise as an employer: 
inspired by visions of the “democratic enterprise”, we wish to see our 
employees become empowered, competent and confident “company 
citizens” who actively contribute to shaping the company and partici-
pate in decision-making processes.
Such a corporate culture is underpinned by binding standards that 
protect employees from arbitrary decisions in the workplace and 
safeguard their opportunities for participation.
EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP 
gRi 102-41
The cornerstones of collaborative and harmonious labor relations at 
Volkswagen are universal human rights and the conventions of the 
International Labour Organization. Based on these, we have agreed 
various charters and declarations with our Group European Works 
Council (GEWC) and Global Group Works Council (GGWC) that safe-
guard the collective rights of our employees in the workplace and the 
organization of their work. They include: 
 §  The Declaration on Social Rights and Industrial Relations at 
 Volks wagen (the Volkswagen Social Charter). We set out the 
fundamental social rights of employees in this declaration in 2002. 
These are based on the relevant conventions of the International 
 Labour Organization. A revised version of the Social Charter was 
signed in 2012.
 § The Charter on Labor Relations. This charter came into force 
in autumn 2009 and combines greater consultative rights for 
 representative bodies with shared responsibilities. It defines the 
rights to information, consultation and co-determination 
 enjoyed by employee representatives of brands, companies and 
sites  represented on the GEWC and GGWC.
by any comparative measure, the employee turnover rate at volkswagen 
is very low, indicating that the strategic focus of our hR policies has 
successfully positioned us as an attractive employer.

Page 76
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
76
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: excellent eMPloyeR
 § The Charter on Temporary Work. In November 2012, Volkswagen’s 
executive management, the GEWC and GGWC signed this char-
ter setting out the principles governing temporary work. These 
include, for example, a guide ratio of temporary employees to core 
workforce, stipulations on equal pay, equal treatment and training 
programs, plus a time limit of 36 months before the offer of a per-
manent position must be considered.
 § The Charter on Vocational Education and Training. As well as a 
high standard of education, the Group seeks to offer attractive de-
velopment opportunities at its various locations. Approved in 2015, 
this charter recognizes vocational training as a core aspect of labor 
relations. To implement the charter, the social partners define cer-
tain aspects such as the trainee selection process, the duration and 
quality of vocational training, plus the conditions for subsequently 
hiring trainees following an apprenticeship. 
 § In addition, there are a number of country and/or site-specific 
agreements that stipulate, for example, standards for training or 
preventive healthcare measures for individual Group companies. 
 
 
These policy foundations underpin the rights of employees and their 
elected representatives at Group level in the European and Global 
Works Councils. They provide a binding framework for the responsible 
development of existing local labor relations using cooperative conflict 
resolution approaches.
EMPLOYEE PARTICIPATION THROUGH ELECTED  
REPRESENTATIVES AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING 
gRi 102-41
Volkswagen has an internationally recognized culture of co-determina-
tion. At many sites, employees are represented in two ways: firstly, by a 
trade union, and secondly, by representatives elected to a works council. 
Many companies in the Group also have a supervisory board on which 
the workforce is represented. The International Charter on Labor Rela-
tions allows employee representatives around the world to conclude 
agreements with local management on specific rights to information, 
consultation and co-determination.
This widespread form of participation has proved highly successful 
over many decades. When major changes are expected, as in the case 
of the pact regarding the future of the Volkswagen brand that was ne-
gotiated in 2016 and to be implemented by 2020 for example, employ-
ee representatives are involved in the planning process from an early 
stage. This ensures that such processes of change are addressed jointly 
and have the support of all employees. We attach great importance to 
informing the workforce of changes as early as possible. Where bodies 
are composed equally of employee and employer representatives, 
both sides always receive all relevant information at the same time. 
These co-determination structures are by no means static, however. Our 
international employee representative bodies are constantly evolving in 
line with the ongoing development of the Group. Executive managers 
and employee representatives meet regularly to consult on relevant 
issues. For instance, all members of the GEWC and GGWC attend a joint 
session every year. As well as discussing the current situation at the 
various sites, the respective HR managers and Group executive manage-
ment also share information about future product and workforce plans 
and consult on social welfare and personnel standards.

Page 77
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
77
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: excellent eMPloyeR PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: excellent eMPloyeR
REMUNERATION, REWARDING PERFORMANCE,  
PROFIT-SHARING AND RETIREMENT PROVISION
A reasonable income is the most important prerequisite for living 
an independent life. As stated in our worldwide Social Charter, all 
remuneration and benefits paid to our employees correspond at the 
very least to the statutory minimums in each country concerned. 
Furthermore, this not only applies to our own workforce, but to all 
our suppliers’ employees as well. As they are collectively agreed with 
trade unions, our rates of pay are usually considerably higher than 
the prevailing minimum levels. When setting pay, we make no gender 
 distinctions: people are recruited, hired and promoted solely on the 
basis of their qualifications and skills. Remuneration is based strictly 
on the job performed and individual performance. This is usually 
calculated according to a three-tier remuneration system comprising 
basic pay plus a performance-related component that additionally 
rewards each individual’s performance. The third component is an 
entitlement to a share in the profits as laid down in the collective 
agreement. This three-tier pay structure has proved to be a convenient 
way of enabling employees to share in the company’s success. 
Employees of Group companies also enjoy further benefits. De-
pending on location, these may include subsidized transport and 
meals, low-cost accommodation, monthly childcare allowances 
and discounts on certain leisure activities. Additional healthcare or 
supplementary pension benefits round off the range of company 
benefits offered.
Along with an attractive remuneration package for our active employ-
ees, we are also concerned to make provision for those embarking on 
the next stage of their life. By offering occupational pension schemes, 
Volkswagen AG, its brands and subsidiaries make an important 
contribution to ensuring that retirees still have an income in later life. 
In addition to employer contributions, employees can convert part of 
their pre-tax salary into pension contributions. 
The extensive social rights enjoyed by employees, strong workforce 
representation, participation in decision-making processes, perfor-
mance-related remuneration and good retirement provision form 
the building blocks of our attractiveness as an employer and together 
constitute the bedrock of our human resources policy. These aspects 
are further augmented by numerous initiatives, agreements and pro-
grams which aim to develop our workforce and create versatile, highly 
qualified teams.

Page 78
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
78
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: skilled and coMMitted eMPloyees
Strategic Objective: 
Skilled and Committed Employees
The second goal of our human resources strategy is to cultivate 
skilled and committed employees. For us, commitment means first 
and foremost actively helping to create value, but also taking change 
in one’s stride and personally initiating process improvements. It 
also means seeing the bigger picture and taking an interest in the 
environment and developments in society at large. We practice such 
corporate citizenship in numerous initiatives – for example in our 
support for volunteering activities, in the aid the Group provides to 
refugees, in the now traditional campaign where employees donate 
the odd cents on their monthly pay slips to “One Hour for the Future”, 
or the work of the Volkswagen Employees’ Foundation. Added to this 
are the  donations – €28.2 million in 2017 – which the Group makes 
directly to charitable causes. 
ON-THE-JOB COMMITMENT
We like to see our employees tackling their work enthusiastically, show-
ing commitment and team spirit while contributing their expertise. In 
return, we invest in our workforce, foster a good working atmosphere 
and offer attractive opportunities for career development. As well as 
listening to their opinions and constructive criticism, this includes 
actively involving our workforce in improving processes and assuring 
quality. 
One tool used for this purpose throughout the Group is our  Employee 
Opinion Survey. We use this standardized Group-wide survey to obtain 
regular feedback on employee satisfaction, and by  extension on 
the extent to which we have fulfilled our goal of being an attractive 
employer. The survey also helps to systematically identify scope 
for improvement and pinpoint the areas where managers need to 
take action within their organizational units. In 2016, we revised 
the  Employee Opinion Survey to include additional questions and 
new tools to help line managers discuss the results with  employees. 
The 2017 survey was conducted at 156 sites and companies in 
48  countries. Approximately 453,000 of over 570,000 employees in 
the participating Group companies responded; this is equivalent to a 
response rate of 79%. In 2017, the score on the employee satisfaction 
index – a key indicator generated by the opinion survey – was 78.3 out 
of 100 possible index points, and thus on a par with the previous year.
Our ideas management program is another important tool for 
 encouraging employee engagement. This program enables employees 
to bring their creativity, knowledge and initiative to bear and take 
responsibility for improving both processes and products. By 2017, 
over 54,000 ideas had been submitted, saving the company approxi-
mately €124 million at German sites operated by Volkswagen AG, 
Volkswagen Sachsen GmbH and Volkswagen Osnabrück GmbH. Ideas 
management is an important leadership and motivational tool for 
plant supervisors and managers. It also contributes to improving 
health and safety in the Volkswagen workplace and helps us reach our 
targets for reducing energy and water consumption, waste, solvents 
and CO2 emissions.

Page 79
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
79
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: skilled and coMMitted eMPloyees PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: skilled and coMMitted eMPloyees
IDEAS MANAGEMENT IN THE VOLKSWAGEN AG*
2017 2016
ideas suggested  54,899   60,793 
implemented ideas for  
improvement
 59,872   65,146 
awarded ideas for improvement  24,267   25,440
savings (€million)  124   142,8 
bonuses (€million)  22   23,8 
* incl. Volkswagen Sachsen GmbH and Volkswagen Osnabrück GmbH. 
 
 
SYSTEMATIC SKILLS DEVELOPMENT
As well as commitment, we place an equally strong emphasis on 
developing employees’ skills. Our education and training system is 
highly sophisticated, and we maintain close ties with public educa-
tional establishments such as vocational schools and universities all 
over the world. 
Well educated employees who regularly update their skills are vital to 
our company. We therefore regularly review the level of our employees’ 
skills and qualifications in order to identify any further education and 
training options that might be suitable for them. 
Further information on the volkswagen group’s awards  
can be found in the Ratings and indices section
LEVEL OF QUALIFICATION
in the Volkswagen Group (in %)
2017
2016
21.5
59.2
16.1
3.1
Higher education Vocational education and training
Secondary education Other 
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
21.8
58.4
16.4
3.4
Our initiatives for enabling employees to acquire further qualifica-
tions are organized around occupational “families” (Berufsfamilien). 
Employees who require similar skills to perform their jobs and who 
possess the associated competencies are said to belong to an occu-
pational family. The general and technical competencies required 
for each specific activity are defined in skills profiles. Employees are 
offered a wide range of opportunities to gain further qualifications, 
allowing them to continually update their skills and deepen their 
knowledge throughout their working lives. In the process, they 
also learn from more experienced colleagues who act as experts and 
pass on their know-how in our occupational family academies.
DUAL MODEL OF VOCATIONAL EDUCATION  
AND TRAINING
The dual model of vocational education and training, in which 
theory and practice are closely intertwined, builds the foundations 
for the advanced skills and excellent performance the Volkswagen 
Group demands. Occupations in Germany are always certified by the 
relevant Chamber of Commerce and Industry and follow generally 
applicable standards, as prescribed by the German Federal Institute 
for  Vocational Training, for instance. Outside Germany, we also apply 
these high German standards, but the content of training courses 
is then also aligned with the national standards and requirements 
in the country concerned. Here, too, the content of the training is 
very much geared to the skills required in the various occupational 
families.  Volkswagen has rolled out this dual model at many of its 
locations outside  Germany as well, and continues to promote the 
model as the core framework for acquiring skilled worker qualifica-
tions. When planning new plants, we factor in dual vocational training 
as standard from the outset. Accordingly, more than three-quarters 
of all trainees in the Group are now learning their trades through the 
dual system. 
As at the end of 2017, the Volkswagen Group had trained 19,207 young 
people in some 50 recognized occupations. We also  support the 
career development of new entrants once they have completed their 
apprenticeship. Particularly talented young skilled workers are sup-
ported through “talent groups”. These two-year  training and develop-
ment programs recruit the best 10% of apprentices from each year’s 
intake at Volkswagen AG and Volkswagen Sachsen GmbH in Zwickau. 
105 skilled workers joined the programs during the year under review, 
taking the total to 956 young men and women since talent groups 
were first launched in 2008. 
On completion of an apprenticeship, the “Wanderjahre” (year abroad) 
program offers young people the opportunity to spend twelve months 
working for a Group company abroad. During the reporting year, 
31 Volkswagen Group sites in 17 countries took part in this develop-
ment program. For the first time, a group of 12 such trainees were sent 
to Volkswagen (China) Investment Co. Ltd. in Beijing. In 2017, 67 par-
ticipants from Germany plus 16 from seven other countries began 
their year abroad within the Volkswagen Group in Germany. 
Further information on our brands’ training and apprenticeship programs  
can be found at: 
– Lamborghini and Ducati | dual education system italy (desi)  
– Porsche | education enables opportunities  
– Scania | transport academy in ghana  
– Brazil | volkswagen senai (region) 
– India | education as mechatronics (region)

Page 80
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
80
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: skilled and coMMitted eMPloyees
APPRENTICES
in the Volkswagen Group in Germany (in %)
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
4.7
4.8
4.8
4.6
4.6
0 1 2 3 4 5
 
EXTENSIVE TRAINING OPPORTUNITIES AT ALL LEVELS
At the Volkswagen Group Academy, skilled workers can choose from 
a broad range of advanced training courses – from further training 
in occupational or cross-disciplinary areas of general interest to the 
company, to specific qualifications in occupational families, through 
to comprehensive personal development programs. In this way, all our 
employees are able to pursue lifelong learning. This further training 
is also largely based on the dual-study model, which combines theory 
with practical experience. Overall, around 93,000 qualification activi-
ties totaling 13.9 million hours of training were completed across the 
Group in 2017. Over 435 courses and programs were newly developed 
for the Volkswagen brand alone.
We have standardized many of the development programs and selec-
tion procedures for executives, managers and group leaders across 
the Group. During the reporting year, the Volkswagen Group Academy 
ran some 524 training programs and assessment centers for execu-
tives, managers and group leaders in 12 countries.
ACADEMIC SKILLS DEVELOPMENT
As part of the Volkswagen Group Academy, AutoUni employs top 
in-house experts and collaborates with higher-education institutions 
to equip the company with leading-edge knowledge for the future. 
Its programs and collaborative study modules use a blended-learning 
format which combines face-to-face classroom teaching with online 
content, supplemented by lectures and conferences. In 2017, around 
9,450 people took part in over 170 AutoUni events all over the world; 
a growing number were transmitted to the Group’s various locations 
via Skype.
AutoUni cooperates with internationally renowned universities, 
 institutes and research centers on numerous research projects, disser-
tations and theses, and offers PhD students in the Group a platform 
for exchanging ideas and gaining interdisciplinary qualifications. 
As at the end of 2017, around 360 PhD students were engaged in 
researching topics of future interest to Volkswagen’s various Group 
companies in Germany. 
In addition, AutoUni facilitates networking between the Group’s 
in-house contacts for higher-education institutions and keeps track 
of collaborative links with universities around the globe: during the 
year under review, over 1,700 national and international cooperation 
agreements were in place with universities, research institutes and 
universities of applied sciences.
All these measures are aimed at maintaining and enhancing the 
high standard of skills and the outstanding expertise of Volkswagen 
employees at Group locations all over the world. Above all, we are 
committed to delivering teaching and learning in our  occupational 
families by following the dual vocational training model, which 
integrates theory and practice in a mutually reinforcing continuum. 
Systematic knowledge transfer by in-house experts at all levels and 
across all brands and specialist fields is another key factor under-
pinning our success.
 
 
 
 
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND HEALTHCARE 
Our efforts to ensure that our employees have well-developed skills 
and a high level of commitment address the first two facets of our 
strategic objective to cultivate “skilled and committed employees”. 
However, alongside a willingness to perform (through participation) 
and empowerment to perform (through having the right qualifica-
tions), there is a third facet, namely capability. This requires our work-
force to be physically and mentally capable of coping with the stresses 
and strains of work. 
Consequently, we do not simply regard the protection and promotion 
of our employees’ health as a self-evident societal obligation and 
reflection of our corporate culture, but also as an integral part of our 
human resources strategy. Volkswagen’s holistic approach to health 
management goes well beyond statutory preventive healthcare and 
occupational safety; it also includes aspects such as work organiza-
tion, ergonomics, prevention, integration and rehabilitation, along 
with leadership culture.
As well as complying with Group guidelines on protecting and pro-
moting health, the medical and healthcare services we provide for our 
employees are in line with the relevant statutory requirements and 
internal regulations at each site. Among other things, we maintain 
a register of jobs that may pose particular problems (list of occupa-
tional diseases) and offer employees in these jobs special prevention 
programs plus increased opportunities for workplace job rotation. 
All sites have at least emergency health provision, while most also 
offer medical services under the oversight of a physician.
Further information on our brands’ partnerships with institutions of higher 
education can be found at: 
– Bentley | crewe engineering & design Unversity technical college (Utc) 
– Lamborghini und Ducati | Motorvehicle Unversity of emilia-Romagna (MUneR) 
– Argentina | Ferdinand Porsche institut (region) 
– Brazil | Paraná (region)
the percentage of trainees in the group’s total workforce in  germany 
has remained at around 5% for many years. collective bargaining agree-
ments ensure that the number of trainees remains fairly constant, 
even during economically challenging times.

Page 81
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
81
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: skilled and coMMitted eMPloyees PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: skilled and coMMitted eMPloyees
In the context of health, sustainability means ensuring that,  ideally, 
every employee is still healthy when they retire. Protecting and 
 promoting employees’ health is a priority for the company, shared by 
both management and employee representatives. As part of our 
strategy process, we have launched our own Group health initiative. 
During its very first year, the initiative had developed and imple-
mented some basic concepts relating to prevention, workplace health 
management and ergonomics throughout the Group. The aims of 
the health initiative are clearly defined: to improve employees’ quality 
of life, reduce stress, avoid chronic illnesses and consequently also 
boost employees’ performance and reduce absenteeism. 
ABSENTEEISM*
Cumulative values (in %)
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
0 1 2 3 4
3.9
3.7
3.7
3.4
3.3
* Production locations with over 1,000 employees, excluding Scania, MAN, Ducati,  
Shanghai Volkswagen Powertrain and Volkswagen Automatic Transmission.  
From 2014: including Porsche. From 2015: including MAN Germany.
IMPROVING OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY
Like preventive healthcare and emergency health provision, the con-
tinuous improvement of occupational safety is vitally important to 
us. As long ago as 2004, the Volkswagen Group drew up an occupa-
tional safety policy which is binding on all Group companies around 
the globe. The same high standards of work organization and occu-
pational safety apply worldwide. For this purpose, in 2010 the Group 
launched its own occupational safety management system (KAMS). 
This system is used to analyze the organizational structures and pro-
cesses for occupational safety at all participating Group companies. 
The findings are held in a central database with Group-wide access. 
To improve information sharing, in recent years the exchange of 
reports on serious and fatal accidents within the Group has been 
introduced. This enables us to take specific action to prevent similar 
accidents across all our sites in the future. Since 2012, Volkswagen 
in Germany has also been running mandatory occupational safety 
training modules for all prospective managers. The group leader 
 qualification modules have likewise been standardized so that occu-
pational safety forms a mandatory part of basic group leader training. 
As a result, we have successfully managed to keep the accident fre-
quency in our companies at a consistently low level.
ACCIDENT INDEXES 
in the Volkswagen Group
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
0 1 2 3 4 5
Accident frequency Accident severity
3.9
5.0
3.5
5.0
3.6
4.8
2.9
4.4
3.4
4.9
the accident frequency index is a measure of the frequency with which 
accidents at work occurred in relation to the total number of hours 
worked. the formula for calculating the index is: number of occupational 
accidents, multiplied by 1 million, divided by the number of hours worked.
the accident severity index indicates how serious the accidents were 
by calculating the ratio of the total number of lost working days to the 
number of hours worked. the formula for calculating the index is: number 
of working days lost, multiplied by 1 million, divided by the number of 
hours worked.
ACCIDENT SEVERITY 
in the Volkswagen Group
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
0 10.000 20.000 30.000 40.000
 39,730
3,144
38,922
2,769
36,420
2,540
28,134
1,855
35,361
2,646
Working day lost Number of occupational accidents
For manufacturing companies in particular, sickness-related absences 
from the workplace are not only a significant cost factor, they also pre-
sent major logistical challenges when planning, for example, shift rotas. 
increased availability of diagnostic and screening measures can help 
reduce absenteeism. the working time lost to the company is calculated 
using the following formula: days of absence x 100/payment-relevant 
days i.e. days when employees are expected to be at work.

Page 82
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
82
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: skilled and coMMitted eMPloyees
PREVENTIVE HEALTHCARE AND REHABILITATION
Preventing accidents and avoiding risks in the workplace is one side 
of the occupational health equation; individual preventive measures 
are the other. The Volkswagen Checkup – a free, comprehensive 
health screening program for all employees – is now established at 
all Volkswagen AG German sites and helps employees stay fit and 
healthy and maintain their performance. Employees appreciate the 
high-quality diagnostics and follow-up preventive healthcare and 
exercise programs. 13,237 checkups were carried out at Volkswagen 
AG sites in 2017, slightly below the level of the previous year, in 
which 14,323 checkups were performed.
This checkup has now been successfully rolled out to almost all 
international sites. Other preventive healthcare programs have 
been brought into line with Group-wide standards. In many cases, 
 country-specific supplementary examinations, such as HIV and 
 tuber culosis tests, have been added. 
At many sites, we offer a tailored rehabilitation program to reinte-
grate employees following serious or prolonged illness, providing 
specific job-related support at an early stage. The aim is to restore 
an  m ployee’s ability to work within three to six months at most.
Further information on our brands’ programs for healthcare  
in the workplace can be found at: 
– ŠKODA | Prevention in focus
At Volkswagen AG, a rehabilitation program may also include specially 
tailored services, depending on a person’s individual needs in each 
case. Examples are “JobReha” which offers one to three weeks of 
outpatient, day-patient or inpatient treatment, mainly for muscu-
loskeletal problems, and the “RehaFit” program, which focuses on 
orthopedic or psychological rehabilitation. Other examples include 
physiotherapy and general or targeted stamina-building exercises 
at workplace fitness centers. We are also steadily expanding our 
provision of support and counseling services for employees with 
mental-health or psychosomatic problems.
If an employee falls ill, our involvement is not solely limited to pro-
viding assistance of a medical nature, however. Volkswagen AG also 
supplements benefits paid by social insurance providers, such as sick 
pay, and provides support to relatives of employees who die. The com-
pany also has a collective accident insurance scheme which insures 
employees against accidents resulting in death or disability. In excep-
tional circumstances of financial need, Volkswagen AG can also offer 
employees short-term loans.
Robots perform tasks that would not be ergonomic  
for humans.

Page 83
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
83
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: skilled and coMMitted eMPloyees PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: WoRk oRganization Fit FoR the FUtURe
Strategic Objective: 
Work Organization Fit for the Future
A job’s attractiveness depends first and foremost on the workplace 
itself. Consequently, we endeavor to provide an innovative working 
environment in our plants and offices which allows individuals to 
fulfill their potential. This includes introducing new approaches 
such as Scrum and design thinking in knowledge work, as well as 
innovative practices on the shop floor, for instance by systemati cally 
designing technology around the workforce and creating more 
opportunities for participation. In addition, we offer working time 
models tailored to individual employees’ requirements and specific 
programs for workers with performance impairments; in these 
 cases in particular, individually tailored forms of work organization 
can significantly boost performance and job satisfaction levels. 
Volkswagen AG’s Work2Work program has been creating new career 
opportunities for employees with differing abilities since 2001. An 
employee’s current potential is matched to workplace requirements 
so that despite a given disability, the individual is nevertheless 
still able to create significant value. More than 2,000 employees have 
benefited from this program in recent years, and 812 people are 
currently employed in Work2Work jobs in Wolfsburg across some 
100 different activities.  
In 2017, we published an Inclusion Report for Volkswagen AG for 
the first time. This set out our experiences over many years of inte-
grating employees with impairments or differing abilities. 
We are also committed to employees with disabilities in other 
countries. For instance, over 200 people with disabilities work in five 
sheltered workshops and other workplaces at ŠKODA production 
plants in Czechia. 
Creating the workplaces of the future also involves making them 
barrier-free for people with disabilities. This includes ensuring that 
all employees, regardless of any impairment, can access and use 
all buildings, information and communication facilities without 
assistance.

Page 84
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
84
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: WoRk oRganization Fit FoR the FUtURe
FLEXIBLE WORKING TIME MODELS
Flexible working time plays a significant role in innovative work 
organization models. Volkswagen is constantly working to further 
enhance the ease with which our employees can combine work 
and family life and thus cater to the particular needs of new parents, 
single parents or employees who are also carers, for example. The 
high levels of uptake of benefits such as parental leave confirm the 
success of this policy.  
RETURNING FROM PARENTAL LEAVE 
at Volkswagen AG (2017)
775
Women
 3,577
Total
 2,802
Men
In September 2016, Volkswagen AG introduced a far-reaching com-
pany agreement governing mobile working, i.e. work away from 
the usual workplace. Such agreements are satisfying the wishes of 
many employees for more flexibility in choosing where and when 
they work. Other Group brands such as Audi and Porsche have 
 similar arrangements. 
Volkswagen AG offers exceptional flexibility in its undertaking to 
re-employ workers who take extended leave: for the past 20 years 
or so, employees have been able to take up to eight years’ leave of 
absence without having to give a reason. Regardless of whether this 
leave is used for a sabbatical, for parental leave or for career devel-
opment purposes, employees have a guaranteed right to re-employ-
ment on the same terms and conditions as before.
We also offer a wide range of options for taking a leave of absence to 
care for close family members. Employees are entitled to take up to 
10 working days of leave at short notice, for example to make arrange-
ments for the appropriate care of a relative who has been taken ill. 
They may also take up to six months part-time or full-time leave to 
care for a family member themselves. Another option offered is part-
time working for up to 24 months in order to meet care obligations.
We believe these options greatly contribute to the present and future 
attractiveness of work at Volkswagen, and consequently help ensure 
that the company remains competitive.

Page 85
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
85
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: WoRk oRganization Fit FoR the FUtURe PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: exeMPlaRy leadeRshiP and coRPoRate cUltURe
Strategic Objective: 
Exemplary Leadership and Corporate Culture
As part of the Group’s TOGETHER – Strategy 2025 program, we 
began a process of radical transformation from the ground up. This 
includes ideas and initiatives for revitalizing our corporate culture. 
For instance, back in 2016 we formulated new Group-wide manage-
ment principles and reviewed the criteria for appointments to 
management positions. In 2017, we worked on implementing this 
new model throughout the Group. Another important new policy 
introduced in 2016 was the Code of Cooperation, which establishes 
a clearly defined set of values for all interactions within the Group. 
As the code defines the ground rules for trust-based collaboration 
within the Group, it also constitutes a key pillar of our strategy. Us-
ing terms such as “trust”, “genuine”, “straightforward”, “open-minded”, 
“as equals” and “united”, it describes how  employees should cooperate 
within our brand network.
Following the definition of the new corporate culture through 
wide-ranging participative processes the year before, 2017 saw the 
rollout of this new culture. Company executives are important role 
models during cultural transformation. Accordingly, in 2017 around 
7,300 executives, managers and works council representatives from 
Volkswagen AG, Volkswagen Sachsen and Volkswagen Osnabrück 
took part in the Volkswagen Integrity, Culture and Compliance Con-
vention, spread over 14 days. They discussed the importance of the 
issues for the company and for themselves. In particular, discussions 
centered on how executives can set an example by showing integ-
rity and communicating corporate culture and compliance in their 
everyday working lives. An e-learning program on these three aspects 
enabled participants to prepare the topics in advance.
EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES AS LEVERS OF CHANGE
As part of our commitment to the United Nations Sustainable 
Development Goals, we champion diversity and equal opportunities 
at all our locations around the world. Our position is crystal clear: 
 Volkswagen stands for respect, tolerance and cultural openness. We 
guarantee equal opportunities and equal treatment irrespective 
of ethnicity, race, gender, disability, ideology, faith, nationality, sexual 
orientation, social background or political conviction, provided the 
latter is based on democratic principles and tolerance toward those 
who hold different views. The Volkswagen Group Code of Conduct, 
which was jointly agreed with our social partners in the Social Charter 
in 2002, underpins these aspirations throughout the Group.  Under 
the code, every employee and member of an executive board is 
responsible for ensuring that colleagues work together in partner-
ship and is obliged to report any breaches immediately.
If any employee feels they are a victim of discrimination, they may 
contact trained Group experts for advice and support. At the initiative 
of the Works Council, employees’ obligations and rights to non- 
discrimination were laid down in 1996 in the “Cooperative Conduct 
at the Workplace” company agreement applicable to all Volkswagen 
AG employees at all its sites. The agreement also covers bullying and 
other forms of discrimination. Every new employee receives a copy 
of it when they join the company and the contents are also covered 
in management training courses. In the event of any breaches, 
 employees can also reference the agreement when submitting a 
complaint. All complaints must be investigated; if they are found to 
be substantiated, appropriate action must be taken immediately. 
Further information on diversity at our brands can be found at: 
– Scania | skill capture

Page 86
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
86
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: exeMPlaRy leadeRshiP and coRPoRate cUltURe
ENHANCING EMPLOYER ATTRACTIVENESS AND 
 TARGETED ADVANCEMENT PROGRAMS 
To Volkswagen, a family-aware human resources policy represents one 
of the key qualities of an attractive employer and is an important lever 
for ensuring greater gender equality. Accordingly, we are continuously 
working to develop family-friendly working time  models and increase 
the proportion of women in management roles. 
As a voluntary undertaking, the Group first proposed  differentiated 
targets for the proportion of female employees in our German work-
force back in 2011. The following principle applies: we recruit the best 
graduates from each year in the required disciplines, taking as our 
starting point the proportion of female graduates on each course. 
When all the courses of relevance to Volkswagen are averaged out, 
these differentiated quotas produce a female graduate recruitment 
target of 30%.
FEMALE EMPLOYEES* 
in the Volkswagen Group (in %)
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
0 5 10 15 20
16.0
16.3
16.0
15.7
15.5
* Since 2013 incl. MAN and Porsche.
Bringing more qualified women into the company will enable us to 
steadily increase the percentage of female executives over the coming 
years. 
As part of the revitalization of our corporate culture, in 2017 we also 
focused our efforts on implementing a specific diversity manage-
ment approach. This drive centers around binding quotas stipulated 
for women in managerial positions and targets for the international 
composition (internationality) of our management boards. These two 
figures are combined in our diversity index, which has been in force 
since 1 January 2017. The diversity index forms part of our human 
resources strategy and applies throughout the Volkswagen Group. We 
use the index as a tool for measuring and managing the implemen-
tation of our equal opportunities and internationality targets for top 
management. The calculation is based on current workforce figures. 
In 2017, the proportion of women in management positions was 
13.8%; we are targeting 20.2% by 2025. We are also aiming to increase 
the internationality of our top management level from 18.7% in the 
financial year just ended to 25.0% by 2025. These targets are decided 
by the Group’s Board of Management and are binding for the whole 
organization. 
As well as introducing systematic diversity management, as required 
by German law we have also defined targets for the percentage of 
female managers at Volkswagen AG. In tune with Germany’s law on 
equal participation for women and men in executive positions, 
Volkswagen AG has set itself targets for increasing the proportion of 
women in management by the end of 2021: 13% on the first level of 
management and 16.9% on the second level. As at 31 December 2017, 
the proportion of women in the active workforce on the first level 
of management was 10.4% (2016: 9.8%), while on the second level the 
proportion was 14.0% (2016: 13.5%).

Page 87
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
87
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: exeMPlaRy leadeRshiP and coRPoRate cUltURe PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: exeMPlaRy leadeRshiP and coRPoRate cUltURe
The Group’s Board of Management and Supervisory Board are  regularly 
updated on the progress we are making toward these targets.
PROPORTION OF WOMEN1  
in the Volkswagen Group in Germany (in %)
2017 2016
total management 11.4 11.0
total apprentices 28.8 29.5
industrial apprentices 23.0 23.3
commercial apprentices 55.4 58.6
students on “dual system” 
courses
33.6 33.5
University graduates recruited 2 30.3 26.0
Total Volkswagen Group in 
Germany
18.2 18.1
¹ Excl. Scania, MAN and Porsche.
² Volkswagen AG.
In the year under review, the proportion of women in managerial 
roles in the Volkswagen Group in Germany rose to 9.2% in senior 
management and 13.2% in management generally (as at year end, 
excluding Scania, MAN and Porsche). The proportion of women in 
top management increased from 4.7% in 2016 to 6.5% in the report-
ing year (as at year end, excluding Scania, MAN and Porsche). The 
proportion of women in management across the Group in Germany 
(excluding Scania, MAN and Porsche) therefore came to 11.4%, up 
from 11.0% the year before.
We are taking a variety of measures to encourage this trend. For 
 instance, 2017 saw a fourth cohort embark on our cross-brand 
management mentoring program, with 55 women participating 
(mainly from the Volkswagen Group in Germany). In addition, 
Volkswagen  offers the “Kompass” program specifically to encourage 
female talent to aim for a career in management. Over the reporting 
period, 60 women from Volkswagen AG, MAN, Volkswagen Sachsen 
GmbH, Volkswagen Osnabrück, Volkswagen Financial Services AG 
and  Autovision GmbH took part in this program. There is a key differ-
ence  between the objectives of the two programs: while “Kompass” 
prepares women for potential leadership roles at Volkswagen, the 
mentoring program is aimed at women in the talent pipeline who 
have already been identified as potential high flyers.
Volkswagen aims to attract female students at an early stage. Our 
 Germany-wide “Woman DrivING Award” and “Woman Experience 
Day” both target female engineering and IT students and graduates, 
aiming to interest them in technical careers with us. 
In addition, Volkswagen is aiming to increase the proportion of female 
skilled workers and group leaders in Germany to 10%. In the 2017 
fiscal year, the percentage of female skilled workers in the Volkswagen 
Group in Germany (excluding Scania, MAN and Porsche) was 7.6%, 
and 4.9% for group leaders.
In order to increase the proportion of female trainees in  industrial 
and technical trades from 23.0% in 2017 to 30% in 2020, we are 
speci fically seeking to attract female talent, for example by arranging 
special work experience and orientation days for young women. The 
aim of these events is to give these young women a taste of training in 
these technical occupations and help them make career  choices. For 
many years, the Volkswagen Passenger Cars, Audi, Porsche,  Volkswagen 
Commercial Vehicles, MAN and Volkswagen Financial Services 
brands have participated in the Germany-wide “Girls’ Day” or “Day of 
the  Future” event. During the reporting year, the “Girls’ Day” format 
 offered more than 2,000 female school students a practical insight into 
the industrial/technical careers on offer in the automotive sector. 
Another step on the way to becoming a family-friendly enterprise 
is our ongoing expansion of tailored childcare provision. Both in 
Germany and other countries, we have found that providing childcare 
facilities in the vicinity of company premises is beneficial. In addition 
to well-established existing facilities, in recent years we have set up a 
number of daycare centers near our operating locations. 
All German sites of the Volkswagen Passenger Cars, Audi, Porsche, 
Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles and MAN brands also offer childcare 
during school holidays. 
With these wide-ranging measures, we are confident that we are 
making a real contribution not only to greater diversity, but also to 
a culture of openness and inclusiveness across all our brands and 
companies.
Further information on our brands’ initiatives for advancing women  
can be found at:  
– SEAT | Women in management 
– Scania | Women Moving the city! 
– India | sakhi group

Page 88
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
88
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: FiRst-Rate hR oRganization
Strategic Objective: 
First-Rate HR Organization
All the objectives and activities described here require a solid foun-
dation. As a company, we believe only strong personnel management 
focused on the interests of both the company and our employees can 
provide the basis for good work policies in an environmentally and 
socially responsible enterprise.
Highly skilled and qualified HR staff are crucial for implementing 
human resources policies that motivate people to perform their best. 
Accordingly, our final strategic objective is to continuously improve 
our HR organization. The goal we have set ourselves is ambitious – 
to shape and support all upcoming change and transformation pro-
cesses in the company, without ever losing sight of our objective of 
creating highly productive, people-friendly working environments.
To attain this vision, we are currently improving the organization of 
our personnel management function. Future efforts will center firstly 
on the digital transformation of work processes, and secondly on 
realigning personnel management.
Our “Empower to transform” human resources strategy formulates 
our previous personnel management objectives in more detail. Not 
only will we ensure that our top teams have the requisite skills; in 
collaboration with our specialist departments we will work on laying 
the foundations for enabling the teams to achieve their full potential – 
among other things by bolstering their ability to continually adapt to 
constantly changing circumstances.

Page 89
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
89
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  stRategic obJective: FiRst-Rate hR oRganization PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  hUMan Rights
Human Rights
As globalization continues to advance, value creation is increasingly 
shifting toward individual sales markets. This trend effectively in-
creases our responsibility for our activities worldwide – including the 
safeguarding of human rights.
Consequently, as the fundamental bedrock underlying all our activities, 
we respect, protect and support all laws around the world that aim to 
protect universal human rights. We reject all forms of child, forced or 
compulsory labor, modern slavery and human trafficking. Naturally, 
this not only applies to our own activities within the Group, but also 
to our relationships with business partners and to their conduct.
Our production and sales exist within globally interlinked structures. 
Human rights risks lie primarily in our upstream value chain and 
in resource extraction industries. Nevertheless, we clearly recognize 
the fact that our company is not completely immune to these risks. 
The cornerstones of collaborative and harmonious labor relations at 
Volkswagen Group are a raft of charters and declarations agreed with 
our Group European Works Council and Global Group Works Council. 
They safeguard employment rights and human rights, such as the 
right to freedom of association, collective bargaining, equal pay, and 
the prohibition of discrimination in the workplace.
To safeguard universal human rights, we take our lead from various 
international, European and national agreements. These include:
 § the United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
 § the UN Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights,
 § the Declaration on Fundamental Principles and Rights at Work  
by the International Labour Organization (ILO),
 § the European Convention on Human Rights, 
 § the OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises, and
 § the German federal government’s National Action Plan for Business 
and Human Rights.
Furthermore, we have clearly set out our Group-wide policy on 
safe guarding universal human rights and what we expect of our 
 employees in this regard in our Code of Conduct. The issue of 
human rights is covered in the section on “Our responsibilities as 
a member of society”. 
Extensively revised in 2017, the Code of Conduct now applies to all 
employees at all levels across all our brands and companies. The parts 
pertaining to human rights were completely revised and substantially 
expanded. Our Corporate Guidelines also lay down further principles. 
 
 
 
PROCESSES FOR SAFEGUARDING HUMAN RIGHTS
We aim to identify human rights risks at the earliest possible juncture 
and act to continually minimize them. We consider the Group’s 
impact on people along our entire value chain. For this reason, we are 
constantly working toward establishing human rights due diligence 
at all levels of our value chain.
Our Risk Management System (RMS) and Internal Control System (ICS) 
are described in Volkswagen AG’s Annual Report (in the Report on 
Risks and Opportunities). The application of these RMS/ICS systems 
across the Group enables the timely identification of risks, including 
the risk of human rights violations.
Other tools used for this purpose include country risk analyses, 
 business partner screenings, questionnaire-based monitoring, 
plus the installation of early warning systems and performance of 
 supplier audits where human rights violations are suspected. 
Volkswagen’s worldwide ombudsman system is our point of contact 
for reporting suspected internal or external cases of non-compliance 
with our sustainability requirements, including infringements of 
 human rights in the supply chain. This system can be used to confi-
dentially report any suspicions – in one of 11 different languages – to 
two independent lawyers appointed by the Group.
If employees, business partners or customers suspect that anyone in 
our employ is acting unlawfully, they can report this transparently 
via a number of whistleblower system channels. The main focus of 
our whistleblower system is on obtaining information about serious 
breaches as specified in our guidelines. Human rights violations are 
a typical example of issues where the criteria for a serious breach are 
the volkswagen group’s complete code of conduct can be found at: 
https://www.volkswagenag.com/presence/nachhaltigkeit/documents/ 
policy-intern/code_of_conduct_2017_vW_group_english.pdf

Page 90
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
90
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  hUMan Rights
automatically met. The whistleblower system guarantees the greatest 
possible protection for both whistleblowers themselves and the 
 people affected, and follows strict rules to ensure that the process is 
fair, transparent and swift.  
Both employees and third parties can report possible breaches to the 
Volkswagen Group’s national and international employee representa-
tive bodies, or to national and international trade union federations.
As part of our Sustainability in Supplier Relations program, we raise 
our employees’ awareness of and provide them with continuous 
training in issues relating to human rights, risks and trends, as well 
as the principles enshrined in our Group-wide Code of Conduct. We 
are currently also conducting an in-depth review of the human rights 
section of our Code of Conduct. We use real-life examples of potential 
human rights violations to illustrate the individual issues and help 
employees put the Code of Conduct’s rules into practice. Informing 
and training employees at all levels in our companies is an essential 
part of our compliance efforts. 
Further information on the whistleblower system, our code of conduct and  
our sustainability in supplier Relations concept can be found in sections:  
– Risk management 
– compliance 
– supplier management
CONFLICT MINERALS
We also believe we have a special responsibility to protect groups along 
our supply chain who are potentially at high risk of human rights 
abuses. Our supplier management therefore includes due diligence 
guidance for building responsible supply chains of minerals from 
conflict-affected and high-risk areas. 

Page 91
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
91
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  hUMan Rights PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  social ResPonsibility
Social 
Responsibility
We aim to be an attractive employer for our workforce and a good 
partner for society. Reliability, trustworthiness and fairness are 
our watchwords – no matter whether we are talking to individual 
 employees, negotiating with collective representative bodies, collab-
orating with regional partners in local infrastructure development 
projects, or cooperating with civil society initiatives and associations.
Our “Empower to transform” human resources strategy seeks to 
 ensure that the Group, our brands and our workforce are well placed 
to adapt to the ever more rapidly evolving challenges of the networked 
digital world. Our human resources strategy is designed to help the 
Volkswagen Group become a global leader in sustainable mobility on 
an enduringly profitable basis. 
Nor does our responsibility to people stop at our factory gates – as a 
good “corporate citizen”, we see ourselves as a driver of local growth, 
contributing to structural development and equal opportunities 
wherever we operate. As part of our strategic approach, we are con-
stantly looking to expand our support for social, cultural and commu-
nity projects that are building a better future.  
CORPORATE CITIZENSHIP 
We have always believed in the importance of recognizing our social 
responsibilities toward our stakeholders. As a multinational enter-
prise, we bear a global responsibility that extends beyond our factory 
gates. The main focus of our corporate social engagement activities 
is on supporting local development, educational and  community 
 projects at many of our sites. Actively responding to societal  challenges 
such as the current refugee situation represents one of the core 
 imperatives of our corporate social responsibility.
We consider it important to take a strategic approach to social engage-
ment, so we select and develop our projects with great care – both 
independently and in collaboration with local partner organizations 
and NGOs. Local on-site project management allows us to react 
 flexibly to our stakeholders’ needs or anxieties. 
We are also seeking to obtain a more complete picture of the effective-
ness of our projects. Building on the London Benchmarking Group’s 
input-output-impact (IOI) model for measuring the effectiveness of 
community engagement initiatives, we have analyzed selected pro-
jects to find out who they benefit. As part of this process, we have also 
aggregated our inputs across the Group and recorded the different 
objectives in detail. This extensive pool of data provides us with an 
overview of the contexts, objectives and impacts of our involvement 
in environmental and community projects. 
Based on this information, we will revise our corporate  citizenship 
strategy in 2018 and define new areas of focus in line with  TOGETHER – 
Strategy 2025. Following a review of our corporate citizenship con-
cepts, we will define appropriate objectives and specific performance 
indicators, along with methods for measuring the effectiveness of 
these strategic initiatives.
In our corporate citizenship endeavors, we have always been guided 
by two principles: continuity and participation.
Over the reporting year, we were extensively involved in some 
250 projects around the globe aiming to improve economic and 
social structures. We also provided emergency assistance on an 
 ad-hoc basis, following natural disasters such as, for example, the 
severe flooding in South Asia and the USA.
Project selection and implementation are guided by our Group-wide 
policies, which provide the decision-making framework for all our 
community activities:
 § The projects align with our corporate mission while addressing a 
global challenge or a specific local issue.
 § They are an expression of the diversity within the Group and the 
socio-cultural environment in which the projects are carried out. 
 § They are developed in close consultation with local stakeholders, 
who are also involved in their implementation.
 § Projects are managed locally under the responsibility of the units 
operating there.
 
By taking into account both local and wider priorities, we are able to 
meet the diverse expectations of our stakeholders. In 2017, the Group 
and all our brands and regions were involved in around 250 projects 
that encompassed development, infrastructure and educational 
initiatives, as well as community projects. Due to the various different 
local circumstances and challenges involved, the projects took on 
numerous different forms. 
Further informationen regarding our brands’ social responsibility  
can be found at: 
MAN | Man impact accelerator 

Page 92
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
92
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  social ResPonsibility
MAIN CORPORATE SOCIAL ENGAGEMENT ACTIVITIES 
We give donations in cash and in kind to support activities and 
projects primarily devoted to research and education, culture, sports 
and social causes. Donations may only be given to recognized 
non-profit organizations or ones specifically endorsed to receive 
donations. We do not make any donations to political parties, party- 
affiliated foundations or individual politicians. In the reporting 
 period,  Volkswagen AG made donations amounting to €28.2 million.
Added to this amount are the donations made by our  employees, 
which go to help support people in need in the vicinity of 
 Volkswagen AG’s various locations. In 2017, Wolfsburg employees 
alone donated more than €460,000. 
One of our largest projects is our strategic partnership with the 
 German Red Cross, which will remain in place for the next three years.
Since the summer of 2003, this initiative has also included the collec-
tion of “spare cents”, whereby Volkswagen employees in Germany and 
abroad donate the odd cents on their monthly pay slips to the “One 
Hour for the Future” campaign. The funds raised are used to support  
a total of 140 projects in seven countries around the world.
Another workforce initiative led to the sale of sustainably farmed 
 fair-trade products in the company’s cafes and restaurants, where the 
sale of products bearing the Fairtrade seal has been promoted since 
1999. Through this commitment, we are helping producers in devel-
oping countries establish socially sustainable businesses. 
The Volkswagen Employees’ Foundation, established in 2011, is 
playing an increasingly significant role in our community activities. 
This charitable foundation aims to support youth outreach as well 
as vocational education and training at all levels, with projects that 
focus on the neighborhoods of Group sites worldwide. It runs projects 
in cooperation with children’s charity terre des hommes. Since 2011, 
the Volkswagen Employees’ Foundation has launched or supported 
more than 20 projects in Germany and elsewhere. 
educating – language courses for various levels of ability  
(here at aUdi ag).
integrating – Work placements offer initial insights  
into working in germany.

Page 93
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
93
PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  social ResPonsibility PeoPle and ResPonsibility  |  social ResPonsibility
Alongside these projects, which are directly supported by Volkswagen 
or the Volkswagen Works Council, we also encourage our employees 
to volunteer for local causes in their free time. To coordinate and 
provide targeted support for volunteering activities, we have made 
the “ Volkswagen pro Ehrenamt” (Volkswagen Supports Volunteering) 
initiative an integral part of our personnel management. Since 2007, 
around 2,600 volunteers have been matched to suitable vacancies 
through this volunteer exchange.
Volkswagen employees who are looking for a new challenge following 
retirement can register with our company “Senior Experts” team. 
This offers them the opportunity to contribute their expertise region-
ally or  globally, either within the company or by providing voluntary 
support to external organizations. In 2017, around 135 Senior Experts 
took part in projects of their choosing, putting their accumulated 
specialist knowledge to good use and contributing to a valuable inter-
generational exchange of experience. During the reporting year, 
28 departments and more than 20 Volkswagen sites worldwide 
 benefited from the program. 
 
 
HELPING REFUGEES: MEETING,  
EDUCATING, INTEGRATING 
Since the summer of 2015, we have been enthusiastically helping 
to support the wave of refugees arriving in Germany. At present, we 
 believe the most urgent priorities for refugees are to learn German 
and acquire entry-level qualifications, as these are the keys for 
unlocking access to further education and training and entering 
the labor market. By the end of 2017, we had helped approximately 
3,500  refugees access language and foundation training courses. 
The help provided by the Volkswagen Group, its brands and com-
panies centered on the following three strands, in which the follow-
ing  activities were organized for refugees during 2017:
detailed information on our brand’s social engagement activities  
can be found on our csR world map under:  
– Volkswagen | volkswagen supports volunteering 
– ŠKODA | employee donation 
– Bentley | voluntary community work 
– Lamborghini | Partnership teatro comunale 
– Volkswagen Commercial Vehicle | Foundation “on the bult”  
– Scania | scania for nutrition 
– Volkswagen Financial Services | Project training wheels  
– MAN | education for a better future in africa 
– Argentina | volunteer group 
– India | Mobile medical service and water shortage 
– Mexico | help for earthquake victims 
– USA | volkswagen group of america Foundation 
– China | german 8
 § Meeting: Providing support for several thousand refugees by 
means of donations, volunteering and social events.
 § Educating: Grants for 100 refugees; language and integration 
 courses for 1,600+ refugees over several months; classes for 
 systematic help with integration and employability skills for 90 
refugees; support for minors at school.
 § Integrating: Work placements and internships for 500 refugees; 
skills assessments and career guidance for over 1,300 refugees, 
introductory training, vocational training and work for around 
130 refugees.
In addition, we complement the large-scale voluntary work of our 
workforce by contributing the services of experts, making dona-
tions in kind and providing vehicles for aid organizations. Evolving 
out of initial efforts to provide immediate aid, our brands and their 
 employees have been involved in developing a wide variety of short 
and long-term social support initiatives.
At various stages of their educational journey, we also help  refugees 
learn the language, obtain qualifications and understand  German 
 culture. This begins with the very youngest: the Volkswagen  Employees’ 
Foundation supports children and adolescents through three years 
of school by funding language learning, integration and the acqui-
sition of qualifications with donations totaling around €2.5 million. 
We also help refugees obtain university degrees. In cooperation 
with the charity start-up “Kiron Open Higher Education”, we sponsor 
 university places in IT and engineering. 
Further information on our brands’ qualification offers for refugees  
can be found at:  
– Volkswagen Commercial Vehicle | german 360° 
– MAN | integration of refugees 
– Argentina | Ferdinand Porsche institute

Page 94
Appendix

Page 95
The Volkswagen Group is committed to sustainable, transparent and responsible  
corporate governance. In this section, we report in more detail on how 
 our sustainability indicators relating to products and production and to people  
and responsibility have developed over recent years.
Appendix

Page 96
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
96
Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORS
As in previous years, we present key environmental indicators for our 
production operations in reporting year 2017. 
The indicators presented here include selected environmental data 
for the Volkswagen Group in aggregated form. The data is collected, 
checked and approved at our production sites in line with an internal 
standard (VW Standard 98 000). In order to improve the accuracy and 
consistency of the resulting information, the collection of environmen-
tally relevant consumption and emission data is subject to a continu-
ous improvement process. This applies in particular to those items of 
information that are calculated using special algorithms. Furthermore, 
the values for December of the preceding year may include some esti-
mated data if, for example, they are based on bills from power suppli-
ers or waste disposal providers which were not yet available at the time 
of compilation. In the next data collection round, this estimated data 
will be replaced with the finalized figures for December.
In line with corporate monitoring of our environmental strategy, the 
reported time series are related back to the 2010 baseline. The current 
reporting year and the preceding year complete the reporting period.
Overall, environmental data is collected from the Group’s production 
sites.
As in the Volkswagen Group’s Annual Report, data in the “Car and light 
commercial vehicles” category is reported for 2010, 2016 and 2017. 
Data for the brands Scania AB, MAN SE, Ducati Motor Holding S.p.A. 
and VW Kraftwerk GmbH is reported in the “Other divisions” category; 
the respective proportions are shown separately in the graphs. Unless 
otherwise indicated, all the Group’s production sites, together with the 
power stations and boiler plants operated by Volkswagen AG in Wolfs-
burg, Kassel and Hanover in Germany, are included in both categories.
The data covers 113 of the Group’s 120 production sites. No data is 
available for Scania’s seven Regional Product Centers. These correspond 
to approx. 0.1% of the workforce at the production sites, hence have no 
relevant influence on the Group’s KPIs.
The Volkswagen Group is essentially an automotive manufacturer  
which produces cars and light commercial vehicles, as well as 
heavy-duty commercial vehicles and buses. MAN SE does, however, 
also manufacture marine engines and power station components. In 
view of this product diversity, our overall environmental impact can-
not simply be expressed in terms of the volume of vehicles produced. 
Consequently, relative indicators are only shown for the “Car and light 
commercial vehicles” category. The number of vehicles produced in 
2017 totaled 10,667,549 cars and light commercial vehicles, as well as 
207,451 heavy-duty commercial vehicles.
The changing production volumes and associated fluctuations in 
capacity utilization levels at our various locations are reflected in 
changes in the absolute values of many indicators. However, in-
creased efficiency did result in improvements in the specific values  
of a number of indicators.
Weather conditions have an appreciable but uncontrollable impact on 
the consumption of resources. This relates primarily to space heating 
demand for both production and non-production areas, since the an-
nual average temperatures impact the direct consumption of energy 
sources, as well as the amount of energy purchased from third parties.
The specific values are also influenced by a range of factors. On the 
one hand, absolute consumption or emission levels may change, while 
on the other, rising or falling production volumes at the individual 
production sites also influence the indicators.
Products and Production

Page 97
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
97
Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORSAppendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORS
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD)*
in g/vehicle
2017
2016
2010
582
469
555
0 200 400 600 800
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION COSTS*
in € million/year
0 50 100 150 200 250
2017
2016
2010
17
227
11
223
12
197
Capital expenditure
Operating costs
* Volkswagen AG production locations in Germany.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION COSTS*
in € million/vehicle
0 50 100 150 200 250
2017
2016
2010
14
186
9
180
11
179
Capital expenditure
Operating costs
* Volkswagen AG production locations in Germany.
DIRECT NOX AND SO? EMISSIONS*
in tonnes/year
2017
2016
2010
0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000
Nitrogen oxides 
(NOx as NO2)
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) Other divisions
Cars and light 
commercial vehicles
4,067
1,063
4,101
1,026
4,331
2,085
* Cars and light commercial vehicles and other divisions.
DIRECT NOX AND SO? EMISSIONS*
in kg/vehicle
2017
2016
2010
0 100 200 300 400
Sulfur dioxide (SO2)
183
3
195
2
373
51
Nitrogen oxides (NOx as NO2)
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD)*
in tonnes/year
2017
2016
2010
0 2,000 4,000 6,000 8,000
Cars and light commercial vehicles Other divisions
6,151
5,171
4,043
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.

Page 98
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
98
Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORS
CO? EQUIVALENTS*
in million tonnes/year
2017
2016
2010
Other divisionsCars and light commercial vehicles
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10
0.081
0.096
0.067
* Cars and light commercial vehicles and other divisions.
CO? EQUIVALENTS*
in kg/vehicle
0 2 4 6 8 10
2017
2016
2010
7.46
8.84
9.21
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
PARTICULATE EMISSIONS* 
in tonnes/year
2017
2015
2010
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
343
333
380
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
PARTICULATE EMISSIONS* 
in g/vehicle
0 20 40 60 80 100
2017
2016
2010
69
67
98
* Cars and light commercial vehicles.
CO? EMISSIONS*
of the Volkswagen Group’s European (EU 28)  
New Passenger Car Fleet in g/km.
0 30 60 90 120 150
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
120
122
121
126
129
* Subject to official publication by the European Commission. (”NEDC test cycle“).
WASTE FOR RECYCLING 1, 2
in million tonnes/year
2017
2016
2010
0 500,000 1,000,000 1,500,000 2,000,000 2,500,000
Non-hazardous waste for disposal
Hazardous waste for disposal
Metallic waste
Other divisions 
Cars and light commercial vehicles
544,108
169,406
2,354,571
518,212
2,274,204
150,238
298,753
97,607
1,845,474
1  The bars for “Non-hazardous waste for recycling”, “Hazardous waste for recycling”  
and “Metallic waste” indicate the share attributable to other Group divisions. This is not depict-
ed for the other fractions, however, due to their minimal share in these amounts.
2 Cars and light commercial vehicles and other divisions.

Page 99
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
99
Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORSAppendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORS
WASTE FOR RECYCLING ¹
in kg/vehicle
2017
2016
2010
0 100 150 200 25050
Non-hazardous waste for disposal
Hazardous waste for disposal
Metallic waste
43.74
211.19
12.70
33.28
12.43
217.27
43.93
13.94
209.32
1 Cars and light commercial vehicles.
PLANTS IN THE VICINITY OF NATURE CONSERVATION AREAS
Plant Distance (km) Area* (ha)
Braunschweig (d): Oker 0.8 53
pozna?, Logistics (pL):  
dolina Cybiny
2.7 30
Chemnitz (d): Zwönitz 2.5 21.3
pozna?, Foundry (pL):  
Fortyfikacje-w-pozna?iu
6.7 40
dresden (d): Mühlberg 1 8.3
pozna?, production (pL):  
dolina Cybiny
0.6 40
ehra-Lessien (d): Vogelmoor 3.9
Mlada Boleslav, production (CZ): 
Radouci
1.2 212
emden (d) 0.9 400
Vrachlabi, production (CZ): 
Krkonose
1.1 23
Hannover (d): Leine 0.75 118
Kvasiny, production (CZ):  
Uh inov-Benàtky
5 42
ingolstadt (d):  
Training ground
3.8 200
Martin, Components (SK):  
Malá Fatra
< 5 12.4
Kassel (d): Fuldatal 1.6 280
Bratislava, production (SK): 
Moravy
< 2 178
Leipzig (d): Tannenwald, Strohgäu 0 20
palmela, production (pOR): 
Arrabida
3.5 24.5
neckarsulm (d): Jagst, Kocher 0.1 95
Barcelona, production (eS): 
Llobregat
3.6 39.3
Osnabrück (d): Mausohr, Belm 5.45 36.1
Martorell, Fe, production (eS): 
Llobregat
0.85 800
Salzgitter (d): Heerter See 7.5 280
pamplona, production (eS): pena 
de etxauri
15 163
Stuttgart (d): Max-eyth-See 0.75 28.8
prat, Components (eS): Llobregat 0.7 15,5
Weissach (d): enztal,  
Stuttgarter Bucht
0.05 84.9
Brüssel, production (B):  
Verrewinkel-Kinsendael
3 44
Wolfsburg (d): Barnbruch 0.2 800
Györ, Components (HU):  
Göny i homokvidék
< 1 30
Zwickau (d): Zwickauer Muldetal 0.1 180
Crewe (UK): West Midlands Moor 5.7
polkovice, Components (pL): 
Jelonek
7.9
polkovice, Sitech (pL): Jelonek 3.2
*Area = Surface area of production loacation.

Page 100
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
100
Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORS
In fiscal year 2017, the Volkswagen Group – including our Chinese 
joint-venture companies but excluding trainees – employed 634,396 
people on average (+2.4%). In Germany, an average of 284,734 employ-
ees were working under contract in 2017; at 44.9% (45.2%), their share 
of the total workforce fell slightly below the previous year’s level. 
As at 31 December 2017, the number of active employees in the 
Volkswagen Group rose by 2.3% to 615,081. Another 8,004 employ-
ees were in the passive phase of semi-retirement and 19,207 young 
people were on training or apprenticeship programs. At the end of 
the year under review, the Volkswagen Group had 642,292 employees 
(+2.5%). The production-related buildup, further hiring of skilled 
workers in Germany and abroad, and an increase in the number of 
employees working at our new plants in Mexico, China and Poland 
were offset by the departure of around 9,800 personnel as a result  
of the partial sale of PGA Group SAS. The number of employees in 
Germany came to 287,480 (+2.1%); employees abroad numbered 
354,812 (+2.8%).
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES
in the Volkswagen Group by Segment
 507,917
Passenger Cars
 16,149
Financial Services
 118,226   
Commercial Vehicles/ 
Power Engineering
WORKFORCE
in the Volkswagen Group
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
626,715
 642,292
610,076
592,586
572,800
0 200,000 400,000 600,000 800,000
EMPLOYEE AGE STRUCTURE
in the Volkswagen Group (in %)
Women Men
0 5 10 15 20 25
1.6
0.4
18.6
3.7
20.9
4.2
16.3
2.6
3.2
0.4
23.0
4.9
< 20 Years
20 – 29 Years
30 – 39 Years
40 – 49 Years
50 – 59 Years
> 60 Years
FOREIGN SERVICE EMPLOYEES* 
in the Volkswagen Group
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
From Germany
Exept Germany
To Germany
4,716
4,526
4,311
4,507
4,052
0 1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000
* From 2013 incl. new Group companies MAN, Scania,  
Porsche AG, Ducati and Porsche Holding.
People and Responsibility

Page 101
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
101
Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORSAppendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORS
APPRENTICES IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP
December 2016 December 2017
Total Domestic country Foreign country Total Domestic country Foreign country
Volkswagen passenger cars 6,807 5,359 1,448  6,306  4,973  1,333 
Audi 2,770 2,650 120  2,851  2,753  98 
ŠKOdA 913 2 911  936 —  936 
porsche 794 759 35  840  796  44 
porsche Holding Salzburg 2,042 1,116 926  1,766  1,114  652 
SeAT 202 47 155  237  64  173 
Bentley 155 0 155  135 —  135 
Weitere 581 18 563  797  366  431 
Automotive Division 14,264 9,951 4,313  13,868  10,066  3,802 
MAn 3,145 2,245 900  3,132  2,169  963 
Scania 944 0 944  1,081 —  1,081 
Volkswagen Commercial Vehicles 956 726 230  932  732  200 
Bereich Nutzfahrzeuge/Bereich Power Engineering 5,045 2,971 2,074  5,145  2,901  2,244 
Commercial Vehicles/power engineering division 181 143 38  194  148  46 
Group 19,490 13,065 6,425  19,207  13,115  6,092 
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP 
by type of work
2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
production workers  310,083 289,438 279,771 273,418 265,474 258,685
non-production workers  313,002 317,787 311,654 300,709 289,623 274,364
Apprentices  19,207 19,490 18,651 18,459 17,703 16,714
Total workforce  642,292 626,715 610,076 592,586 572,800 549,763
of whom: active employees*  615,081 601,443 585,242 566,998 545,596 525,245
in passive phased retirement  8,004 5,782 6,183 7,129 9,501 7,804
*All employees with a current contract of employment in a Group company who are involved in the value creation process.
NUMBER OF EMPLOYEES IN THE VOLKSWAGEN GROUP 
by region
2017 2016 2015 2014 2013 2012
europe  474,522 464,199 451,257 438,631 424,964 410,427
The Americas  59,086 58,491 59,329 59,790 61,796 63,193
Africa  5,918 6,082 6,388 6,330 6,356 6,461
Asia  101,643 96,823 91,991 86,752 78,672 68,704
Australia  1,123 1,120 1,111 1,083 1,012 978
Total  642,292 626,715 610,076 592,586 572,800 549,763
of whom: temporary staff  27,684  21,806  17,909  15,161  17,419  24,914 
permanent staff  614,608 604,909 592,167 577,425 555,381 524,849

Page 102
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
102
Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORS
AVERAGE AGE AT VOLKSWAGEN AG
2017 2016 2015 2014 2013
Women 39.5 39.0 38.6 38.4 38.3
Men 44.5 44.2 43.7 43.6 43.7
Total 43.6 43.2 42.9 42.8 42.9
PARENTAL LEAVE* AT VOLKSWAGEN AG
2017 2016 2015 2014 2013
Women  889 821 718 601 537
Men 2,743 2,540 2,112 1,658 1,285
Total 3,632 3,361 2,830 2,259 1,822
* Number of employees who started their parental leave in the year in question.

Page 103
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
103
Appendix  |  WeiTeRe KennZAHLenAppendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY indiCATORS

Page 104
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
104
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
GRi 101: Foundation 2017
GeneRAL diSCLOSUReS
GRi 102: General disclosures 2017
ORGANIZATIONAL PROFILE 
102-1 name of the organization 16
102-2 primary brands, products, and services 16–19;
Annual Report 2017: divisions
102-3 Location of the organization's 
 headquarters
16
102-4 Countries with significant operations 18 14
102-5 nature of ownership and legal form 16;
Annual Report 2017: Structure 
and Business Activities
102-6 Markets served 18;
Annual Report 2017: divisions
102-7 Scale of the organization  18;
Annual Report 2017: divisions
102-8 information on employees and other 
workers 
102–103 no breakdown by employees and supervised workers nor 
within the individual categories by gender (level of coverage 
not material).
The moderate use of temporary work represents an essential 
flexibility instrument for Volkswagen. The principles of our 
Charter on Temporary Work serve to ensure appropriate condi-
tions of employment and remuneration for temporary external 
personnel and the standardized use of temporary work as an 
instrument across the Volkswagen Group. Volkswagen does not 
use external personnel to replace its own employees. Contracts 
for work and services are an essential instrument for meeting 
special personnel requirements (such as specific knowledge). 
The use of contracts for work and services is a normal proce-
dure. Volkswagen concludes such contracts for example with 
companies from the trades who are engaged in building work 
at the factories, with companies who supply, maintain and re-
pair plant and equipment, with cleaning firms, as well as with 
iT and development companies in order to access their specific 
knowledge. Volkswagen attaches great importance to ensuring 
that the Group's high social standards are integrated into its 
supplier management. We take reports of possible violations 
seriously and follow them up. if violations are determined, we 
ensure they do not recur.
6 8
102-9 Supply chain  19 4
102-10 Significant changes to the organization 
and its supply chain 
Annual Report 2017: Structure 
and Business Activities
4
This Sustainability Report was drawn up in compliance with the 
GRI Standards (applying the “Comprehensive” option). At the same 
time, we show how we are implementing the requirements of the 
United Nations Global Compact (UNGC) and living up to the Sustain-
able  Development Goals (SDG) as well as the criteria of the German 
 Sustainability Code (DNK).
The declarations, disclosures and references that appear in the Index 
relate to the 2017 fiscal year (January 1 to December 31, 2017).
GRI Content Index

Page 105
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
105
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
102-11 precautionary principle or approach  27–28, 44–47
Annual Report 2017: Risk 
Management and internal 
Control System
7 1
102-12 external initiatives  4, 27 1
102-13 Membership of associations  30–34;
Volkswagen memberships 
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
19
STRATEGY
102-14 Statement by the most senior 
 decision-maker
12–13 1
102-15 Key impacts, risks, and opportunities 
concerning sustainability
12–13, 46–47 2
ETHICS AND INTEGRITY
102-16 Values, principles, standards, and norms 
of behavior 
12–13, 27;
Group Values, Model of 
 Sustainable development, 
Code of Conduct  
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
10 16 5, 6, 7
102-17 Mechanisms for advice and concerns 
about ethics 
42–43 10 17 20
GOVERNANCE
102-18 Governance structure  27–28
102-19 delegating authority for  economic, 
environmental, and social topics
27–28;
Annual Report 2017: Report of 
the Supervisory Board
102-20 executive-level responsibility for 
 economic, environmental, and social 
topics 
27–28;
44–45;
Annual Report 2017: Sustain-
able Value enhancement
5
102-21 Consulting stakeholders on economic, 
environmental, and social topics 
Annual Report 2017: 
 disclosures Required under 
Takeover Law;  
Annual Report 2017: Shares 
and Bonds
16 9
102-22 Composition of the highest governance 
body and its committees 
27–28;
Annual Report 2017: Report  
of the Supervisory Board;
Annual Report 2017:  
Corporate Governance Report;
Annual Report 2017:  
executive Bodies 
5, 16
102-23 Chair of the highest governance body Annual Report 2017: 
 Cooperation;
Annual Report 2017: Report of 
the Supervisory Board
16
102-24 nominating and selecting the highest 
governance body
Annual Report 2017:  
Corporate Governance Report
5, 16
102-25 Conflicts of interest Annual Report 2017:  
Cooperation; 
Annual Report 2017: Report of 
the  Supervisory Board
16
102-26 Role of highest governance body in 
setting purpose, values, and strategy
Annual Report 2017: Report  
of the Supervisory Board;
Annual Report 2017:  
Corporate Governance Report
5

Page 106
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
106
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
102-27 Collective knowledge of highest 
 governance body 
Annual Report 2017:  
Corporate Governance Report
4
102-28 evaluating the highest governance 
body’s performance 
Annual Report 2017:  
Corporate Governance Report
8
102-29 identifying and managing economic, 
environmental, and social impacts 
46–47;
Annual Report 2017:  
Corporate Governance Report
16 5
102-30 effectiveness of risk management 
processes 
46–47;
Annual Report 2017:  
Corporate Governance Report
5
102-31 Review of economic, environmental, 
and social topics 
46–47;
Annual Report 2017:  
Corporate Governance Report
5, 7
102-32 Highest governance body’s role in 
 sustainability reporting 
27–28 5
102-33 Communicating critical concerns  Annual Report 2017:  
Corporate Governance Report
14
102-34 nature and total number of critical 
concerns 
Annual Report 2017:  
Report of the Supervisory 
Board
9
102-35 Remuneration policies  77;
Annual Report 2017: 
 Remuneration Report
8
102-36 process for determining remuneration  Annual Report 2017: 
 Remuneration Report
15
102-37 Stakeholders’ involvement in 
 remuneration 
Annual Report 2017: 
 Remuneration Report
16
102-38 Annual total compensation ratio  77;
Annual Report 2017: 
 Remuneration Report
8
102-39 percentage increase in annual total 
compensation ratio 
77;
Annual Report 2017: 
 Remuneration Report
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
102-40 List of stakeholder groups  31 9
102-41 Collective bargaining agreements  75–76 percentage not given (not a relevant indicator) 3 8 14
102-42 identifying and selecting stakeholders  31–34 9
102-43 Approach to stakeholder engagement  28, 31–34 9
102-44 Key topics and concerns raised  28, 32–34 9
REPORTING PRACTICE
102-45 entities included in the consolidated 
financial statements 
4;
Annual Report 2017:  
Basis of Consolidation
102-46 defining report content and topic 
Boundaries 
28–31
102-47 List of material topics  27–28 2
102-48 Restatements of information  4
102-49 Changes in reporting  4; 28–30 2
102-50 Reporting period  4

Page 107
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
107
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
102-51 date of most recent report  4
102-52 Reporting cycle  4
102-53 Contact point for questions regarding 
the report 
126
102-54 Claims of reporting in accordance with 
the GRi Standards 
106
102-55 GRi content index  106–117
102-56 external assurance  122–123
GRi STAndARdS: eCOnOMiC TOpiCS
ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
16 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
16–22, 35–36 1, 5, 8 3, 6
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
44–47 3, 7
GRi 201: economic performance 2017
201-1 direct economic value generated and 
distributed 
96–97;
Annual Report 2017:  
Value Added Statement
2, 5, 7, 8, 9 18
201-2 Financial implications and other risks 
and opportunities due to climate 
change 
47 7 13
201-3 defined benefit plan obligations and 
other retirement plans 
77;
Annual Report:  
provisons for pensions
201-4 Financial assistance received from 
government 
16, 97;
Annual Report 2017:  
Cost of Sales
10
MARKET PRESENCE
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
75, 77
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
75, 77
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
75, 77
GRi 202: Market presence 2017
202-1 Ratios of standard entry level wage by 
gender compared to local minimum 
wage 
75, 77; 
Charter on Labour Relations, 
Social Charter, Charter on 
Temporary Work  
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
1, 2, 6 1, 5, 8
202-2 proportion of senior management hired 
from the local community 
75, 77; 
Charter on Labour Relations 
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
1, 2, 6 8

Page 108
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
108
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
INDIRECT ECONOMIC IMPACTS
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
26, 72, 91
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
26–27, 91–92
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
27, 91–92
GRi 203: indirect eonomic impacts  2017
203-1 infrastructure investments and services 
supported 
91–92 2, 5, 7, 9, 
11
203-2 Significant indirect economic impacts  91–92 1, 2, 3, 8, 
10, 17
PROCUREMENT PRACTICES 
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
37 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
37–41 3, 4, 6
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
39–41 3, 7
GRi 204: procurement practices  2017
204-1 proportion of spending on local 
 suppliers 
37;
Annual Report 2017: 
 procurement
percentage not indicated (data not collectable) 12
ANTI-CORRUPTION
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
44 10 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
35, 44–45 10 3, 6
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
46–47 10 3, 7
GRi 205: Anti-Corruption  2017
205-1 Operations assessed for risks related to 
corruption 
44 no breakdown by location (distribution is immaterial) and risks 
identified (confidential information)
10 16 20
205-2 Communication and training about 
anti-corruption policies and procedures 
45 percentage not indicated (data not collectable)
no further breakdown by governance body members, employ-
ee category and regions (data is not collectable and publishable 
respectively due to local labor laws)
10 16 20
205-3 Confirmed incidents of corruption and 
actions taken 
44;
Annual Report 2017: 
 Ombudsman System
no breakdown by nature of confirmed incidents of corruption 
(confidential information)
10 16 20
ANTI-COMPETITIVE BEHAVIOR
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
44 10 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
35, 44–45 10 3, 6
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
46–47 10 3, 7

Page 109
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
109
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
GRi 206: Anti-Competitive Behavior 2017
206-1 Legal actions for anti-competitive 
behavior, anti-trust, and monopoly 
practices 
Annual Report 2017: Litigation 10 16 20
GRi STAndARdS: enViROnMenTAL TOpiCS
MATERIALS
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
50, 64 7, 8, 9 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
50–54 7, 8, 9 3, 6, 11, 12
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
50–51 7, 8, 9 3, 7
GRi 301: Materials 2017
301-1 Materials used by weight or volume  64–65 8, 9 8, 12 11, 12
301-2 Recycled input materials used  64–65 8, 9 8, 12 11, 12
301-3 Reclaimed products and their packaging 
materials 
64 8, 9 8, 12 11, 12
ENERGY
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
50, 55, 59 7, 8, 9 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
50–62 7, 8, 9 3, 6, 10, 
11, 12
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
50–51 7, 8, 9 3, 7
GRi 302: energy 2017
302-1 energy consumption within the 
 organization 
60 8 7, 12, 13 11, 12
302-2 energy consumption outside of the 
organization 
— energy consumption not indicated; we report  
Scope 3 emissions instead (see GRi 305-3).
8, 9 7, 8, 12, 13 11
302-3 energy intensity  60 8 7, 8, 12, 13 11
302-4 Reduction of energy consumption  59–62 8, 9 7, 8, 12, 13 10, 12
302-5 Reduction in energy requirements of 
products and services 
58–59 8, 9 7, 8, 12, 13 10, 12
WATER
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
50, 65 7, 8 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
50–54, 65–66 7, 8 3, 6, 11, 12
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
50–51 7, 8 3, 7
GRi 303: Water 2017
303-1 Water withdrawal by source  65–66 8 6 11, 12
303-2 Water sources significantly affected by 
withdrawal of water 
65 8 6 11, 12
303-3 Water recycled and reused  — Total volume of recycled water not indicated; data 
 uncollectable due to the complexity of the company.
8 6, 8, 12 11, 12

Page 110
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
110
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
BIODIVERSITY
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
50, 68 7, 8 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
54, 68 7, 8 3, 6, 11, 12
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
50–51 7, 8 3, 7
GRi 304: Biodiversity 2017
304-1 Operational sites owned, leased, 
 managed in, or adjacent to, protected 
areas and areas of high biodiversity 
value outside protected areas 
68, 101 8 6, 14, 15 11
304-2 Significant impacts of activities, prod-
ucts, and services on biodiversity 
68;
Mission Statement on 
Biodiversity, engagement for 
biodiversity  
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
8 6, 14, 15 11
304-3 Habitats protected or restored  68;
Mission Statement Biodiversi-
ty, engagement for biodiversity 
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
8 6, 14, 15 11
304-4 Species with habitats in areas affected 
by operations 
68 8 6, 14, 15 11
EMISSIONS
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
50, 55, 59 7, 8, 9 12, 13, 14, 
15
2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
50–59, 61–63 7, 8, 9 12, 13, 14, 
15
3, 6, 11, 
12, 13
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
50–51 7, 8, 9 12, 13, 14, 
15
3, 7
GRi 305: emissions 2017
305-1 direct (Scope 1) GHG emissions  60 8, 9 3, 12, 13, 
14, 15
13
305-2 energy indirect (Scope 2) GHG emissions  61 8, 9 3, 12, 13, 
14, 15
13
305-3 Other indirect (Scope 3) GHG emissions  62 8, 9 3, 12, 13, 
14, 15
13
305-4 GHG emissions intensity  61 8 13, 14, 15 13
305-5 Reduction of GHG emissions  61–62 8, 9 13, 14, 15 13
305-6 emissions of ozone-depleting substanc-
es (OdS) 
— no significant emissions 8, 9 3, 12, 13 13
305-7 nitrogen oxides (nOX), sulfur oxides 
(SOX), and other significant air emissions 
67, 99–100 8, 9 3, 12, 13, 
14, 15

Page 111
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
111
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
EFFLUENTS AND WASTE 
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
50, 65, 66 7, 9 12, 13, 14, 
15
2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
50–52, 54, 65–67 7, 9 12, 13, 14, 
15
3, 6, 11, 12
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
50–51 7, 9 12, 13, 14, 
15
3, 7
GRi 306: effluents and Waste 2017
306-1 Water discharge by quality and 
 destination 
66 8, 9 3, 6, 12, 14 11
306-2 Waste by type and disposal method  67, 100–101 8, 9 3, 6, 12 11, 12
306-3 Significant spills  — no significant spills were registered in the reporting period. 8, 9 3, 6, 12, 
14, 15
11
306-4 Transport of hazardous waste  — Total weight cannot be computed due to the size and com-
plexity of the company. We do not import any waste, we only 
export small volumes of waste, and we only dispose of waste 
in the countries in which it is generated or export it to other 
countries if these offer better disposal methods.
8 3,12 11, 12
306-5 Water bodies affected by water 
 discharges and/or runoff 
66, 101 8, 9 6, 15 11, 12
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
63 7 12, 13, 14, 
15
2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
44–45, 63 7 12, 13, 14, 
15
3, 6, 11, 12
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
44–45, 63 7 12, 13, 14, 
15
3, 7
GRi 307: environmental Compliance 2017
307-1 non-compliance with environmental 
laws and regulations 
Annual Report 2017: Litigation 7 16
SUPPLIER ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
50 7, 8, 9 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
36–41 7, 8, 9 3, 6, 11, 12
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
39–41 7, 8, 9 3, 7
GRi 308: Supplier environmental Assessment 2017
308-1 new suppliers that were screened using 
environmental criteria 
39;
Code of Conduct for Business 
partners  
(https://www.volkswagenag.
com/presence/nachhaltigkeit/
documents/policy- 
intern/2016%20Code%20
of%20Conduct%20for%20
Business%20partners%20 
de-en.pdf)
8 11, 12
308-2 negative environmental impacts in the 
supply chain and actions taken 
37–38, 40;
Annual Report 2017: 
 procurement
8 4, 11, 12

Page 112
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
112
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
GRi STAndARdS: SOCiAL TOpiCS
EMPLOYMENT
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
72, 75 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
72–76, 88 3, 6, 14
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
72–73, 75–76, 88 3, 7
GRi 401: employment 2017
401-1 new employee hires and employee 
turnover 
75 The selection and recruitment of new employees is undertaken 
in line with their qualifications and suitability. Age is not a 
consideration in this process. Another control metric is the 
 recruitment of women. When recruiting university graduates 
we take our lead from the proportion of women graduates 
on the degree courses relevant for Volkswagen. As an average 
across all such courses this gives us a recruitment target of 
30% of female graduates. As a matter of principle, Volkswagen 
also supports the employment and qualification of local 
 people, both at existing locations and when establishing 
new ones.
6 5, 8
401-2 Benefits provided to full-time 
 employees that are not provided to 
temporary or part-time employees 
77 Both full-time and part-time employees are entitled to 
company benefits.
6 8 15
401-3 parental leave  84, 104  Volkswagen offers its employees a whole range of options 
and rulings to facilitate the return to work after parental leave, 
including information events on current working-hour models, 
as well as on the flexible and personalized design of their 
return to work.
6 5, 8 15
LABOR/MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
76 3 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
72–74, 76 3 3, 6
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
72–73, 75–77 3 3, 7
GRi 402: Labor/Management Relations 2017
402-1 Minimum notice periods regarding 
operational changes 
76;
Annual Report 2017:  
disclosures Required under 
Takeover Law;  
Charter on Labour Relations, 
Charter on Temporary Work  
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
3 8 14
OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
72, 80 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
72–76, 80–82 3, 6, 14
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
72–76, 80–81 3, 7

Page 113
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
113
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
GRi 403: Occupational Health and Safety 2017
403-1 Workers representation in formal joint 
management–worker health and safety 
committees 
75–76; 
Charter on Labour Relations
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
8
403-2 Types of injury and rates of injury, 
occupational diseases, lost days, and 
 absenteeism, and number of work- 
related fatalities 
81 no additional breakdown by gender and region provided (con-
fidential information). Current contracts with the companies 
working for Volkswagen do not allow us to access the required 
information.
3, 8 16
403-3 Workers with high incidence or high risk 
of diseases related to their occupation 
80–82 3, 8 16
403-4 Health and safety topics covered in 
formal agreements with trade unions 
75–76; 
Charter on Labour Relations
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
8 16
TRAINING AND EDUCATION
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
72, 78 6 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
72–74 6 3, 6, 15
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
72–73, 79 6 3, 7
GRi 404: Training and education 2017
404-1 Average hours of training per year per 
employee 
80 Vocational education and training to the highest standards 
form a vital basis for the specialist knowledge and skills of our 
employees and thus also for the top quality of our products 
and the long-term commercial success of the Volkswagen 
Group. The specific qualification requirements of each individu-
al employee are derived from the competency requirements 
of the respective Berufsfamilie (professional family) and are 
identified at almost all of the Group's brands and companies 
at least once a year through the individual employee appraisal 
or qualification appraisal. The focus here is above all on the 
specialist content, the appropriate form of communicating this 
content and, in particular, the marked integration of theory 
and practice.
6 4, 5, 8 16
404-2 programs for upgrading employee skills 
and transition assistance programs 
79–80 6 8 16
404-3 percentage of employees receiving 
regular performance and career 
 development reviews 
80 every employee of Volkswagen AG, Volkswagen Financial 
Services AG and Volkswagen immobilien Service GmbH has 
an individual appraisal with their supervisor once a year. 
This practice is also becoming increasingly established at the 
various brands and companies of the Volkswagen Group. The 
annual individual appraisal is conducted irrespective of gender 
and employee category.
6 5, 8 16
DIVERSITY AND EQUAL OPPORTUNITY
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
73, 85–86 4, 6 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
72–74, 84, 86–87 4, 6 3, 6, 14, 15
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
72–73, 86 4, 6 3,7
GRi 405: diversity and equal Opportunity 2017
405-1 diversity of governance bodies and 
employees 
87;
Annual Report 2017: 
 Objectives for the composition
There is enormous potential within the diversity of the 
Volkswagen Group workforce. As we move towards becoming 
top employer in the automotive sector, we want to make use 
of this potential by explicitly advancing women, improving 
the scope for combining work and family, and making full use 
of the cultural diversity that exists within the Group. in our 
experience a breakdown by minority group membership is not 
a relevant indicator.
4, 6 5, 8 15, 16
405-2 Ratio of basic salary and remuneration 
of women to men 
77, 86;
Social Charter 
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html)
At Volkswagen remuneration is a function of the activity 
 performed by the employee. in this respect we make no 
distinction between women and men.
4, 6 5, 8, 10 15

Page 114
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
114
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
NON-DISCRIMINATION
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
72, 85 6 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
72–74, 83, 85–87 6 3, 6, 14, 
15, 17
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
72–73, 85–86 6 3, 7
GRi 406: non-discrimination 2017
406-1 incidents of discrimination and 
 corrective actions taken 
40–41;
Annual Report 2017: 
 Ombudsman System
in the event of discrimination, the Company will take 
appropriate action against an individual who is acting in a 
discriminatory way; sanctions range from a formal warning 
through relocation to dismissal. if an employee feels he or 
she is being discriminated against, the Company not only 
meets the statutory provisions for reporting a grievance, but 
also provides the individual concerned with access to trained 
personnel for support and advice.
6 5, 8, 16 16, 17
FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION AND COLLECTIVE BARGAINING
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
72 1, 2, 3 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
72–74, 76–77 1, 2, 3 3, 6, 14, 17
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
72–73, 76–77 1, 2, 3 3,7
GRi 407: Freedom of Association and Collective Bargaining 2017
407-1 Operations and suppliers in which the 
right to freedom of association and 
collective bargaining may be at risk 
76 1, 2, 3 8 17
CHILD LABOR 
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
89 1, 2, 5 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
89–91 1, 2, 5 3, 6, 14, 17
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
1, 2, 5 3,7
GRi 408: Child Labor 2017
408-1 Operations and suppliers at significant 
risk for incidents of child labor 
89 1, 2, 5 16 17
FORCED OR COMPULSORY LABOR
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
89 1, 2, 4 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
89–90 1, 2, 4 3, 6, 14, 17
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
89–90 1, 2, 4 3,7
GRi 409: Forced or Compulsory Labor 2017
409-1 Operations and suppliers at  significant 
risk for incidents of forced or 
 compulsory labor 
89 1, 2, 4 8 17

Page 115
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
115
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
SECURITY PRACTICES
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
89 1, 2 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
89–90 1, 2 3, 6, 14
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
89–90 1, 2 3, 7 
GRi 410: Security practices 2017
410-1 Security personnel trained in human 
rights policies or procedures 
89 percentage not indicated (data not collectable) 1, 2 16 17
RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
89 1, 2 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
89–90 1, 2 3, 6, 14, 17
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
89–90 1, 2 3, 7
GRi 411: Rights of indigenous peoples 2017
411-1 incidents of violations involving rights 
of indigenous peoples 
89 1, 2 2 17
HUMAN RIGHTS ASSESSMENT 
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
89 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
72–74, 89–90 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
3, 6, 14, 17
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
72–73, 76–77, 89–90 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
3,7
GRi 412: Human Rights Assessment 2017
412-1 Operations that have been subject 
to human rights reviews or impact 
assessments 
89–90 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
17, 18
412-2 employee training on human rights 
policies or procedures 
89–90 no indication of the number of hours or percentage of  
employees (data not collectable)
1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
17, 18
412-3 Significant investment agreements and 
contracts that include human rights 
clauses or that underwent human rights 
screening 
37–38;
Charter on Labour Relations 
(www.volkswagenag.com/de/
sustainability/policy.html);
Code of Conduct for Business 
partners (https://www.volk-
swagenag.com/presence/na-
chhaltigkeit/documents/pol-
icy-intern/2016%20Code%20
of%20Conduct%20for%20
Business%20partners%20de-
en.pdf)
1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
17, 18

Page 116
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
116
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
LOCAL COMMUNITIES
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
72, 91 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
26, 31–33, 72, 91–93 3, 4, 6
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
91–92 3, 7
GRi 413: Local Communities 2017
413-1 Operations with local community 
engagement, impact assessments, and 
development programs 
91–93 17, 18
413-2 Operations with significant actual and 
potential negative impacts on local 
communities 
26, 47, 91 1, 2 4
SUPPLIER SOCIAL ASSESSMENT 
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
37 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
36–41 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
3, 4, 6
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
39–41 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
3, 7
GRi 414: Supplier Social Assessment 2017
414-1 new suppliers that were screened using 
social criteria 
38, 39–40;
Code of Conduct for  
Business partners 
(https://www.volkswagenag.
com/presence/nachhaltigkeit/
documents/policy-intern/ 
2016%20Code%20of%20 
Conduct%20for%20Busi-
ness%20partners%20de-en.
pdf)
percentage not indicated (data not collectable) 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
5, 8, 16 17, 18
414-2 negative social impacts in the supply 
chain and actions taken 
38, 40–41 no details stated for individual subpoints (data not obtainable) 1, 2, 3, 4, 
5, 6
5, 8, 16 17, 18
PUBLIC POLICY
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
91 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
91–92 3, 6
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
91–92 3,7
GRi 415: public policy 2017
415-1 political contributions 92 10 16 19
CUSTOMER HEALTH AND SAFETY
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
23, 50, 69 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
23–24, 54, 63, 69 3, 4, 6

Page 117
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
117
Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index Appendix  |  GRi COnTenT index
GRI CONTENT INDEX
GRI  
Standard
Disclosure References Comments UNGC SDG GSC
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
23–24, 69 3,7
GRi 416: Customer Health and Safety 2017
416-1 Assessment of the health and safety 
 impacts of product and service 
 categories 
69 10
416-2 incidents of non-compliance concerning 
the health and safety impacts of 
 products and services 
69;
Annual Report 2017: Litigation
16
MARKETING AND LABELING
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
23, 50, 69
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
23–24, 54, 63, 69
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
23–24, 69
GRi 417: Marketing and Labeling 2017
417-1 Requirements for product and service 
information and labeling 
69 8, 9 12, 16
417-2 incidents of non-compliance concerning 
product and service information and 
labeling 
Annual Report 2017: Litigation 16
417-3 incidents of non-compliance concerning 
marketing communications 
Annual Report 2017: Litigation
CUSTOMER PRIVACY
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
26 10
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
26, 44–45 10
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
44–45 10
GRi 418: Customer privacy 2017
418-1 Substantiated complaints concerning 
breaches of customer privacy and losses 
of customer data 
— Confidential information 10 16
SOCIOECONOMIC COMPLIANCE
GRi 103: Management Approach 2017
103-1 explanation of the material topic and 
its Boundary 
44 2, 4
103-2 The management approach and its 
components 
44–45 3, 4, 6
103-3 evaluation of the management 
approach 
44–45 3,7
GRi 419: Socioeconomic Compliance 2017
419-1 non-compliance with laws and 
 regulations in the social and economic 
area 
Annual Report 2017: Litigation 16 14, 20
Key:  
SdG = Sustainable development Goals 
Un GC = United nations Global Compact 
GSC = German Sustainability Code 

Page 118
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
118
Appendix  |  RATinGS And indiCeS
Because analysts and investors view corporate social responsibility 
(CSR) and sustainability as key indicators of forward-thinking corpo-
rate governance, their recommendations and decisions are increas-
ingly based on factors that include companies’ CSR and sustainability 
profiles. They look to sustainability ratings in particular to evaluate 
a company’s performance in terms of environmental compatibility, 
social responsibility and economy. Achieving top marks in these rat-
ings not only sends a clear signal to stakeholders, but also helps make 
a company more attractive as an employer and boosts the motivation 
of its employees.
STRATEGY AND MANAGEMENT
Before the emissions issue, Volkswagen held leading positions in 
sustainability rankings and indices such as the Dow Jones Sustain-
ability Indices, the CDP Carbon Disclosure Project, Sustainalytics and 
oekom research. Now, however, Volkswagen has been downgraded or 
removed from these ratings. 
In terms of customer satisfaction with their products, Audi and 
Porsche are leaders in the core European markets when compared 
with other Group brands and with their competitors. The other 
brands in the Group also score higher than competing brands. In 
terms of customer satisfaction with dealers, all Group brands achieve 
figures at or above the level of the competition. The Volkswagen 
Passenger Cars brand has maintained a high level of customer loyalty 
in its core European markets for several years in a row. However, the 
emissions issue had a negative impact on brand image, brand trust, 
and customer satisfaction with products compared with 2015. The 
loyalty of Audi, Porsche and ŠKODA customers has kept these brands 
in the upper rankings in comparison with competitors for a number 
of years. 
 
detailed information on the Volkswagen Group’s awards can be found in  
the more detailed Sustainability sections of our brands and regions.
PRODUCTS AND PRODUCTION
Volkswagen Group wins fleet awards in the UK: five Golds in the Fleet 
News Award 2017; Audi UK named “Fleet Manufacturer of the year”. 
(At the presentation of the Fleet News Award 2017 by UK trade journal 
Fleet News, the Volkswagen Group succeeded in taking five first places. 
The best fleet models in the UK in 2016 were evaluated in a total of 
12 automobile categories. This year’s Fleet News Award was present-
ed in London for the twenty-ninth time. The jury, made up of fleet 
customers, Fleet News editors and representatives of associations and 
carmakers, assessed the vehicles’ quality, maintenance costs (including 
residual values) and CO2 emissions. 
The evening’s overall winner was the Audi brand, with three first places. 
In the “Best Compact Premium Car” category, the jury put the A3 in 
first place, while the A4 took first place in the “Best Premium Car” class. 
Being voted “Fleet Manufacturer of the year” was the evening’s icing on 
the cake for the Audi brand. The ŠKODA brand won another first place 
for the Group with the Superb in the “Best Upper Medium Car” category, 
as did the SEAT Ateca in the “Best Mid-Size SUV” class.).
At the WAVE Trophy 2017 event in Switzerland, the new e-Golf won a 
double victory. The world’s biggest e-mobile rally was held in Switzer-
land in June. It lasted eight days and covered around 1,600 kilometers. 
Leading the rest of the pack were two e-Golfs, which eventually finished 
first and second – clearly demonstrating that e-mobility is suitable for 
everyday use and also makes for a great driving experience. The natural 
gas-powered VW Caddy 1.4 TGI took the trophy in the 5-seater van 
class.
Further successes were achieved in the VCS Environmental ranking 
published in March 2017. In the subcompact class, the VW eco up!, 
Škoda Citigo and Seat Mii, all equipped with the 1.0 natural-gas engine, 
took first place with equal points, to become the test winners in 2017. 
In the compact (small family) class, the Audi A3 Sportback TFSI g-tron 
took first place just ahead of the VW Golf TGI; again, both run on 
natural gas.
Ratings and Indices

Page 119
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
119
Appendix  |  RATinGS And indiCeS Appendix  |  RATinGS And indiCeS
As part of optimizing the entire value chain in the most holistic way, 
we aim to minimize the environmental impact of our vehicles by work-
ing closely with our suppliers. This is why Volkswagen joined the CDP 
Supply Chain Program (SCP) back in 2015. In addition, we seek to stay 
in direct contact with our suppliers by organizing targeted workshops 
in which we jointly discuss and develop innovative approaches to the 
environmental optimization of components and processes.
In 2016, we used the CDP SCP to send out a questionnaire to 119 sup-
pliers. We received comprehensive responses from 83% of them – 13% 
more than the average response rate in the SCP.
This year, the CDP evaluated the “Ability” of the 3,300 participating 
companies to make contact with their suppliers. On a scale from A to 
D, Volkswagen achieved an A- ranking, versus an average rating of C-. 
The ranking was based on an analysis of the answers to the question-
naire. 
 
detailed information on the Volkswagen Group’s awards can be found in  
the more detailed Sustainability sections of our brands and regions.
 
Through our involvement in national and international industry and 
sector associations, we continue to work with other automotive man-
ufacturers to create shared communication platforms with the aim of 
driving forward sustainability in the supply chain.
PEOPLE AND RESPONSIBILITY
Once a year, Volkswagen honors its highest-achieving trainees across 
the Group with the “Best Apprentice Award”. In 2017, ten young wom-
en and 36 young men from a total of 43 Group locations received this 
award for their outstanding performance and technical expertise.
detailed information on the Volkswagen Group’s awards can be found in the 
more detailed Sustainability sections of our brands and regions.
 

Page 120
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
120
Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY  inFORMATiOn
Supplementary  
Information
LINKS AND WEBSITES
GENERAL INFORMATION
Content Type of information
Online Annual Report Link
Volkswagen online brand portal Link
Associated companies Link
STRATEGY AND MANAGEMENT
Content Type of information
Group Values Link
Model of Sustainable development document
Code of Conduct document
Board remuneration Link
Risks and opportunities in the Management Report Link
Volkswagen in the Transparency Register Link
Opportunities for dialog with the Volkswagen Group document
Group memberships document
principles and Guidelines for political Lobbying document
Appendix to the principles and Guidelines for political Lobbying document
Volkswagen Group website Link
Stakeholder panel and evaluation 2014 document
Volkswagen Group requirements regarding sustainability in its relationships  
with business partners
document
Taxes and duties policy document
Ombudsman system Video-Link
Sustainability in Supplier Relations brochure document
Compliance in the Annual Report Link

Page 121
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
121
Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY  inFORMATiOn Appendix  |  SUppLeMenTARY  inFORMATiOn
PEOPLE AND RESPONSIBILITY
Content Type of information
Social Charter document
Charter on Labour Relations document
Charter on vocational educational training document
Charter on Temporary Work document
CSR projects Worldwide Link
PRODUCTS AND PRODUCTION
Content Type of information
Group environmental policy document
Group environmental principles Locations/production document
Group environmental principles product document
Mission Statement on Biodiversity document
Overview of environmentally certified locations Table
Think Blue. Link
engagement for biodiversity Link
CO 2-neutral production document
Renawable raw materials document
Think Blue. nature. document
Mobility Managament at Locations Link

Page 122
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
122
Appendix  |  independenT pRACTiTiOneRS RepORT
TO VOLKSWAGEN AG, WOLFSBURG
We have performed a limited assurance engagement on the combined 
separate non-financial report pursuant to §§ (Articles) 289b Abs. 
(paragraph) 3 and 315b Abs. 3 HGB] (“Handelsgesetzbuch”: “German 
Commercial Code”) of Volkswagen AG, Wolfsburg, (hereinafter the 
“Company”) for the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017 
which comprises the sections marked with a grey background in the 
Group Sustainability Report 2017 of the Company (hereinafter the 
“Non-financial Report”). 
RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE EXECUTIVE DIRECTORS
The executive directors of the Company are responsible for the 
preparation of the Non-financial Report in accordance with §§ 315b 
and 315c in conjunction with 289c to 289e HGB and the principles 
stated in the Sustainability Reporting Standards of the Global 
Reporting Initiative (hereinafter the “GRI-Criteria”).
This responsibility of Company’s executive directors includes the 
selection and application of appropriate methods of non-financial 
reporting as well as making assumptions and estimates related to 
individual non-financial disclosures which are reasonable in the 
circumstances. Furthermore, the executive directors are responsible 
for such internal control as they have considered necessary to enable 
the preparation of a Non-financial Report that is free from material 
misstatement whether due to fraud or error.
INDEPENDENCE AND QUALITY CONTROL  
OF THE AUDIT FIRM
We have complied with the German professional provisions re-
garding independence as well as other ethical requirements.
Our audit firm applies the national legal requirements and pro-
fessional standards – in particular the Professional Code for German 
Public Auditors and German Chartered Auditors (“Berufssatzung für 
Wirtschaftsprüfer und vereidigte Buchprüfer“: “BS WP/vBP”) as well  
as the Standard on Quality Control 1 published by the Institut der  
Wirtschaftsprüfer (Institute of Public Auditors in Germany; IDW):  
Requirements to quality control for audit firms (IDW Qualitätssiche-
rungs standard 1: Anforderungen an die Qualitätssicherung in der 
¹  PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH has performed a limited assurance engagement on the German 
version of the separate non-financial report and issued an independent assurance report in 
German language, which is authoritative. The following text is a translation of the independent 
assurance report.
Wirtschaftsprüferpraxis – IDW QS 1) – and accordingly maintains 
a comprehensive system of quality control including documented 
policies and procedures regarding compliance with ethical 
requirements, professional standards and applicable legal and 
regulatory requirements.
PRACTITIONER´S RESPONSIBILITY
Our responsibility is to express a limited assurance conclusion on the 
Non-financial Report based on the assurance engagement we have 
performed. 
Within the scope of our engagement we did not perform an audit on 
external sources of information or expert opinions, referred to in the 
Non-financial Report.
We conducted our assurance engagement in accordance with the 
International Standard on Assurance Engagements (ISAE) 3000 
(Revised): Assurance Engagements other than Audits or Reviews of 
Historical Financial Information, issued by the IAASB. This Standard 
requires that we plan and perform the assurance engagement to allow 
us to conclude with limited assurance that nothing has come to our 
attention that causes us to believe that the Company’s Non-financial 
Report for the period from 1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017 has 
not been prepared, in all material aspects, in accordance with §§ 315b 
and 315c in conjunction with 289c to 289e HGB and the relevant GRI-
Criteria. 
In a limited assurance engagement the assurance procedures are  
less in extent than for a reasonable assurance engagement, and 
therefore a substantially lower level of assurance is obtained. 
The assurance procedures selected depend on the practitioner’s 
judgment. 
Within the scope of our assurance engagement, we performed 
amongst others the following assurance procedures and further 
activities:
 §  Obtaining an understanding of the structure of the sustainability 
organization, of the stakeholder engagement and of the 
conduction of the materiality analysis
 §  Inquiries of personnel involved in the preparation of the Non-
financial Report regarding the preparation process, the internal 
control system relating to this process and selected disclosures  
in the Non-financial Report
Independent Practitioner’s Report  
on a Limited Assurance Engagement on  
Non-financial Reporting¹ 

Page 123
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
123
Appendix  |  independenT pRACTiTiOneRS RepORTAppendix  |  independenT pRACTiTiOneRS RepORT
 §  Identification of the likely risks of material misstatement of the 
Non-financial Report
 §  Analytical evaluation of selected disclosures in the Non-financial 
Report
 §  Evaluation of the implementation of group management 
requirements, processes and specifications regarding data 
collection through onsite visits at selected sites and brands  
of the VW Group
 § Volkswagen AG (Wolfsburg, Germany)
 §  Volkswagen do Brasil Indústria de Veículos Automotores Ltda. 
(Anchieta, Brasil)
 §  Volkswagen de México, S.A. de C.V. (Puebla, Mexico) 
 §  Volkswagen of South Africa (Pty) Ltd. (Uitenhage,  
South Africa)
 §  Volkswagen Slovakia a.s. (Bratislava, Slovakia)
 §  SAIC Volkswagen Automotive Co. Ltd. Shanghai  
(Shanghai/Anting, China)
 §  Audi AG (Ingolstadt, Germany)
 § Audi AG (Neckarsulm, Germany)
 § Audi Hungaria Motor Kft. (Gy?r, Hungary)
 § Porsche Leipzig GmbH (Leipzig, Germany)
 § Škoda Auto a.s. (Mladá Boleslav, Czech Republic)
 §  Assessment of the aggregation of Scope-3-GHG-emissions 
 (categories 1 and 11) on group level
 §  Comparison of selected disclosures with corresponding data in 
the annual and consolidated financial statements and in the 
group management report which is combined with the 
Company’s management report
 §  Evaluation of the presentation of the non-financial information
ASSURANCE CONCLUSION
Based on the assurance procedures performed and assurance evidence 
obtained, nothing has come to our attention that causes us to 
believe that the Company’s Non-financial Report for the period from 
1 January 2017 to 31 December 2017 has not been prepared, in all 
material aspects, in accordance with §§ 315b and 315c in conjunction 
with 289c to 289e HGB and the relevant GRI-Criteria.
INTENDED USE OF THE ASSURANCE REPORT
We issue this report on the basis of the engagement agreed with 
the Company. The assurance engagement has been performed for 
purposes of the Company and the report is solely intended to inform 
the Company about the results of the limited assurance engagement. 
The report is not intended for any third parties to base any (financial) 
decision thereon. Our responsibility lies only with the Company. We 
do not assume any responsibility towards third parties.
Frankfurt am Main, 23 February 2018
PricewaterhouseCoopers GmbH
Wirtschaftsprüfungsgesellschaft
Frank Hübner Michael Conrad
Wirtschaftsprüfer Wirtschaftsprüfer
[German public auditor] [German public auditor] 

Page 124
VOLKSWAGEN GROUP SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
124
Appendix  |  iMpRinT
PUBLISHER
Volkswagen AG 
Group Sustainability 
Letterbox 011/1265  
38436 Wolfsburg 
Germany
CONTACT
info@volkswagen-nachhaltigkeit.de
EDITING
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft
CONCEPT, COPY AND DESIGN
Kirchhoff Consult AG, Hamburg 
Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft
ENGLISH TRANSLATION
The Word Gym Ltd., GB
PHOTOS
Volkswagen Group and its brands
DATE OF PUBLICATION
Date of Publication: March 2018  
© Volkswagen Aktiengesellschaft 
Errors and mistakes reserved
DISCLAIMER 
At the brands of the Volkswagen Group, work on all types and models 
never ceases, so please allow for the fact that changes in design, 
equipment and technical specifications may be made at any time. 
Consequently, the data and descriptions in this report cannot give rise 
to claims of any kind.
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS 
This report contains forward-looking statements on the development 
of the Volkswagen Group and its companies as well as on econom-
ic and political developments. These statements are assumptions 
that we based on all the information available to us at the time of 
reporting. If the assumptions made fail to materialize or additional 
risks occur, then the actual results, development and performance of 
the Group may differ from the forecasts given. The Volkswagen Group 
therefore assumes no liability for the forward-looking statements 
presented here.
The German version is binding. The English version is a convenience 
translation for information purposes only.
YOUR FEEDBACK 
In the interests of improving and advancing our commitment to 
sustainability, we would be delighted to receive your feedback on our 
sustainability report. You can send us your views online under the 
above mentioned mail adress.
Imprint

